Astanga Astanga Hridaya Hridaya Sutra Sutra Sthan Sthan Vagbhat Vagbhat Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter आयु कामीयं Adhyaya Chapter 1: 1: Ayushkameeya Ayushkameeya aespraey Adhyaya “Desire “Desire for for long long life” life” 1. 1. Salutations Salutations रागा द Mae] रोगान ् AAA सततानIAC षकाय सAANA त यमोहारfle तदाeTजघान WIM AIHA aT ुष तान ् शे ृ ानशेषान ्औ सु TIATER यो अपूववै याय aval नमो seq अ तु act त मै a aqddeaes Salutation Salutation to to The The Unique Unique and and Rare Rare Physician, Physician, who who has has destroyed, destroyed, without without any any residue residue all all the the diseases jealousy, selfishness, diseases like like Raga Raga (lust, (lust, anger, anger, greed, greed, arrogance, arrogance, jealousy, selfishness, ego), ego), which which are are constantly constantly associated associated with with the the body, body, which which is is spread spread all all over over the the body, body, giving giving rise rise to to disease, disease, delusion delusion and and restlessness. restlessness. This Lord Dhanwantari. Dhanwantari. This salutation salutation is is done done to to Lord 2. life: Essential 2. Purpose Purpose ofoflife: Essential quality quality to to learn learn Ayurveda Ayurveda आय कामायमानेन TAS धमाथ Teast सुखसाधनम ् ।| sradetreey आयुवदोपदे शेषfata: Wy: ु: HATTA wWarey: ॥I ु वधेय: परमादर: āyu: ayu: kāmāyamānena kamayamanena dharmārtha dharmartha sukhasādhanam sukhasadhanam || āyurvedopadeśeṣu ayurvedopadesesu vidheya: vidheya: paramādara: paramadara: ||| To life, that To achieve achieve the the purpose purpose ofoflife, that is is 1. Dharma 1. Dharma —– following following the the path path of of righteousness righteousness 2. Artha 2. Artha —– earning earning money money in in a a legal legal way way 3. Kama fulfilling our 3. Kama —–fulfilling our desire desire 4. Moksha achieving Salvation, 4. Moksha —–achieving Salvation, To To achieve achieve this this purpose purpose of of life, life, one one should should concentrate concentrate on on having having aa long long life. life. To To learn learn the the science science of of Ayurveda, Ayurveda, which which explains explains how how to to achieve achieve this this purpose, purpose, ‘obedience’ ‘obedience’ (Vidheya) (Vidheya) is is the the most most important important quality. quality. 3. 3. Origin Origin of of Ayurveda Ayurveda मृ वा आय जाप तमिज हे सो अि वनौ तौ पु ा दका मुनी ते FEAमा TAca syुषो वेaeदं voraaatsagca saat at सह ageatा ं सो a अ sifaqarecreactet siseraenieeredt YAH Afert अि नवे शा दकां ते ©टु प थ त ा ण ते नरे ृ क् aearioy Lord Lord Brahma, Brahma, remembering remembering Ayurveda, Ayurveda, taught taught it it to to Prajapathi, Prajapathi, he he in in turn turn taught taught it it to to Ashwini Ashwini Kumaras Kumaras (twins), (twins), they they taught taught it it to to Sahasraksa Sahasraksa (Lord (Lord Indra), Indra), he he taught taught it it to to Atri’s Atri’s son son (Atreya (Atreya Punarvasu) Punarvasu) and and other other sages, sages, they they taught taught it it to to Agnivesa Agnivesa and and others others and and they they (Agnivesha (Agnivesha and and other other disciples disciples )) composed composed treatises, treatises, each each one one separately. separately. Page Page No. No. 2 2 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 44 –-— 4.5. 4.5. Funda Funda of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hrudayam: Hrudayam: ते त व क य यः wer: ायः area: सारतरो चयः had यते अ टा ग दयं ना तसं ेप व तरम ् asaयो अ sfefavchrees: ssessaecad afaaasaaeata, From From those those Ayurvedic Ayurvedic text text books, books, which which are are too too elaborate elaborate and and hence hence very very difficult difficult to to study, study, only only the the essence essence is is collected collected and and presented presented in in Ashtanga Ashtanga Hridaya, Hridaya, which which is is neither neither too too short short nor nor too too elaborate. elaborate. 4.5-5.5 4.5-5.5 —– Branches Branches of of Ayurveda Ayurveda कायबाल हो वा ग श यदं ा AUTGIML जरावष अ टाव गा न AeATg: त याहु: Fafeear च क सा Ay येषु aya सं ता || PAATAIAST MEAT ृ ान ् ||| Heras kāyabālagrahordhvāṅga jarāvṛṣān |||| aṣṭāvaṅgāni kayabalagrahordhvanga śalyadaṃṣṭrā salyadamstra jaravrsan astavangani tasyāhu: tasyahu: cikitsā cikitsa yeṣu yesu saṃśritā samsrita | | RYN 1. 2. 3. 4. PIN 5. 6. 7. 8. Kaya Kaya Chikitsa Chikitsa —– General General medicine medicine Bala Bala Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Paediatrics Paediatrics Graha Graha Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Psychiatry Psychiatry Urdhvanga Urdhvanga Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Diseases Diseases and and treatment treatment of of Ear, Ear, Nose, Nose, Throat, Throat, Eyes Eyes and and Head Head (neck (neck and and above above region) region) Shalya Shalya Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Surgery Surgery Damshrta Damshrta Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Toxicology Toxicology Jara Jara Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Geriatrics Geriatrics Vrushya Vrushya Chikitsa Chikitsa —– Aphrodisiac Aphrodisiac therapy therapy These These are are the the eight eight branches branches of of Ayurveda. Ayurveda. 5.5 5.5 —– 6.5 6.5 Tridosha Tridosha वायु: fed प तं कफ चे त Tal यो are: दोषा: समासत: वकृताऽ वकृता es दे हं called नि त Aते aedaied व तयि त Tच | । ary: pedi AAA: ॥Il fapatsfapar vāyu: vayu: pittaṃ pittam kaphaśceti kaphasceti trayo trayo doṣā: dosa: samāsata: samasata: ||| vikṛtā’vikṛtā vikrta’vikrta dehaṃ deham ghnanti ghnanti te te varttayanti varttayanti ca ca || Vayu Vayu – — Vata, Vata, Pitta Pitta and and kapha kapha are are the the three three Doshas Doshas of of the the body. body. Perfect Perfect balance balance of of three three Doshas Doshas leads leads to to health, health, imbalance imbalance in in Tridosha Tridosha leads leads to to diseases. diseases. 6.5-7.5 6.5-7.5 How How Thridosha Thridosha are are spread spread in in body body and and in in a a day? day? ते या पनोऽ प eeasaNaAeaed ना योरधोम यो व Gar: सं या: ॥Il a catatsh वयोऽहोरा भु तानां ते ऽ तम या दगा: HAL मात ् ।| aatsenaaraa AseaHeATesM: te te vyāpino’pi vyapino’pi hṛnnābhyoradhomadhyordhva hrnnabhyoradhomadhyordhva saṃśrayā: samsraya: ||| vayo’horātribhuktānāṃ vayo’horatribhuktanam te’ntamadhyādigā: te’ntamadhyadiga: kramāt kramat || The The Tridosha Tridosha are are present present all all over over the the body, body, but but their their presence presence is is especially especially seen seen in in particular particular parts. parts. If If you you divide divide the the body body into into three three parts, parts, the the top top part part upto upto chest chest is is dominated dominated by by Kapha Kapha Dosha, Dosha, between between chest chest and and umbilicus umbilicus is is dominated dominated by by Pitta, Pitta, below below umbilicus umbilicus part part is is dominated dominated by by Vata. Vata. Page Page No. No. 3 3 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Similarly, Similarly, in in aa person’s person’s life, life, day day and and in in night night (separately), (separately), the the first first part part is is dominated dominated by by Kapha, Kapha, second second part part is is dominated dominated by by Pitta Pitta and and third third part part is is dominated dominated by by Vata. Vata. While While eating eating and and during during digestion, digestion, the the first, first, second second and and third third part part are are dominated dominated by by Kapha, Kapha, Pitta Pitta and and Vata Vata respectively. respectively. 7.5 7.5 Types Types of of digestive digestive fires fires तै भवे वषम: ती द चाि न: समै astaafasa: detणो म Aeceaitet: GH: : सम: FA: ॥I tairbhavedviṣama: tairbhavedvisama: tīkṣṇo tiksno mandaścāgni: mandascagni: samai: samai: sama: sama: ||| There There are are four four types types of of Digestive Digestive fires fires (Agni) (Agni) 1. 1. 2. 2. 3. 3. 4. 4. Vishama Vishama Agni Agni-—– Influenced Influenced by by Vata. Vata. A A person person with with Vishama Vishama Agni Agni will will sometimes sometimes have have high high appetite, appetite, and and sometimes, sometimes, low low appetite. appetite. Teekshna Teekshna Agni Agni -- Influenced Influenced by by Pitta. Pitta. A A person person with with Teeksna Teeksna Agni Agni will will have have high high digestion digestion power power and and appetite. appetite. Manda Manda Agni Agni - - Influenced Influenced by by Kapha. Kapha. A A person person with with Manda Manda Agni Agni will will have have low low digestion digestion power power and and appetite. appetite. Sama Sama Agni Agni - - Influenced Influenced by by perfect perfect balance balance of of Tridosha Tridosha – — Where Where person person will will have have proper proper appetite appetite and and digestion digestion power. power. Digestion Digestion occurs occurs at at appropriate appropriate time. time. 8.5 8.5 Types Types of of digestive digestive tracts tracts // nature nature of of bowels bowels को द या तै: TART समैर प ।| HIS:ठ: HUू रो म AGHA ACA:य: TAiect: ु यो म ृ म koṣṭha: kostha: krūro kriro mṛdurmadhyo mrdurmadhyo madhya: madhya: syāttai: syattai: samairapi samairapi || There There are are three three types types of of digestive digestive tracts tracts (Koshta): (Koshta): 1. Kroora 1. Kroora Koshta Koshta —– wherein wherein the the person person will will take take long long time time for for digestion. digestion. The The bowel bowel evacuation evacuation will will be be irregular. irregular. It It is is influenced influenced by by Vata. Vata. 2. Mrudu 2. Mrudu Koshta Koshta —– Sensitive Sensitive stomach, stomach, has has aa very very short short digestion digestion period. period. Even Even administration administration of of milk milk will will cause cause bowel bowel evacuation. evacuation. 3. Madhya 3. Madhya Koshta Koshta —– Proper Proper digestive digestive tract, tract, bowel bowel evacuation evacuation at at appropriate appropriate times. times. It It is is influenced influenced by by Tridosha Tridosha balance. balance. 9-10 9-10 Types Types of of Prakruti Prakruti—– Body Body Types Types श ज मादौ fatete वषेणव ै faves: वषकृमे: ॥| तै त : anidaed: deaच foe: ु ातव थै: sraret समधात:ु TACA सम तासAor न या afaaryat वदोषजा ॥I WAU: ु े ठा felequr कृतयो ह नम यो तमा: प थ welt seraeatcaar: Jaw ृ क् ।| śukrārtavasthai: janmādau viṣeṇaiva sukrartavasthai: janmadau visenaiva viṣakṛme: visakrme: ||| taiśca taisca tisra: tisra: prakṛtayo prakrtayo hīnamadhyottamā: hinamadhyottama: pṛthak prthak || samadhātu: samadhatu: samastāsu samastasu śreṣṭhā srestha nindyā nindya dvidoṣajā dvidosaja ||| Like Like the the poison poison is is natural natural and and inherent inherent to to poisonous poisonous insects, insects, similarly, similarly, the the Prakruti Prakruti (body (body type) type) is is inherent inherent to to humans. humans. The The body body type type is is decided decided during during conception, conception, based based on on qualities qualities of of sperm sperm and and ovum. ovum. Vata Vata prakruti prakruti—– Vata Vata body body type type is is considered considered as as low low quality quality Pitta Pitta Prakruti Prakruti—– Pitta Pitta body body type type is is considered considered as as moderate moderate quality quality Kapha Kapha Prakruti Prakruti—– Kapha Kapha body body type type is is considered considered good good quality. quality. Page Page No. No. 4 4 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Tridosha Tridosha body body type type —– influenced influenced equally equally by by Vata, Vata, Pitta Pitta and and Kapha Kapha is is considered considered the the best best quality. quality. Dual Dual body body types, types, Like Like Vata-Pitta, Vata-Pitta, Pitta-Kapha, Pitta-Kapha, Vata-Kapha Vata-Kapha body body types types are are considered considered as as not not good. good. 10.5 10.5 Qualities Qualities of of Vata Vata त लघ:ु शीत: aa wal ो oe: efit: खर: GE: स Teaedetsfera: ू म चलोऽ नल: ॥I tatra tatra rūkṣo rukso laghu: laghu: śīta: Sita: khara: khara: sūkṣmaścalo’nila: stksmascalo’nila: ||| Rooksha Rooksha —– dryness, dryness, Laghu Laghu – — Lightness, Lightness, Sheeta Sheeta —– coldness, coldness, Khara Khara – — roughness, roughness, Sookshma Sookshma – — minuteness, minuteness, Chala Chala – — movement movement These These are are the the qualities qualities of of Vata. Vata. 11. 11. Qualities Qualities of of Pitta Pitta प तं स ने ह Hevisor ती णो णं लघ व ं सरं वम ् ।| fied wets oy ु fas We sae pittaṃ pittam sasneha sasneha tīkṣṇoṣṇaṃ tiksnosnam laghu laghu visraṃ visram saraṃ saram dravam dravam || Sasneha slightly oily, piercing, entering Sasneha —–slightly oily, unctuous, unctuous, Teekshna Teekshna – — piercing, entering into into deep deep tissues, tissues, Ushna Ushna —– hotness, hotness, Laghu Laghu – — lightness, lightness, Visram Visram – — bad bad smell, smell, sara sara —– having having fluidity, fluidity, movement, movement, drava drava – — liquidity liquidity are are the the qualities qualities of of Pitta. Pitta. 12. 12. Qualities Qualities of of Kapha Kapha िfeatser: न ध: शीतो गु म द: LaeU ल णो Acker: म ृ न: िFEAT: थर: कफ: eflal TeAea: AH: ॥Il snigdha: snigdha: śīto sito gururmanda: gururmanda: ślakṣṇo slaksno mṛtsna: mrtsna: sthira: sthira: kapha: kapha: ||| Snigdhna oily, unctuous, Snigdhna – — oily, unctuous, Sheeta Sheeta —– cold, cold, Guru Guru —– heavy, heavy, Manda Manda —– mild, mild, viscous, viscous, shlakshna shlakshna —– smooth, slimy, jely, jely, sthira smooth, clear, clear, Mrutsna Mrutsna – — slimy, sthira —– stability, stability, immobility immobility are are the the qualities qualities of of Kapha. Kapha. eat: Beas सं सगः सि नपात च Tafa त वterrentyd: यकोपतः The The increase, increase, decrease decrease of of individual individual Doshas, Doshas, or or imbalance imbalance of of couple couple of of these these Doshas Doshas is is called called as as Samsarga. Samsarga. And And imbalance imbalance of of all all the the three three Doshas Doshas together together is is called called as as Sannipata. Sannipata. 13. 13. Body Body tissues tissues and and waste waste products products असक मांसAel मेदो sea अि थ Ast म ज श THरस 3h Yowrey a: ।| ु ा ण धातव: ृ ् Ale स द ू या: मला: ् वेदादयोऽ प च ॥Tl Adत Sal: Aol: म ATू शक Mh ृ त HateatshF rasa rasa asṛk asrk māṃsa mamsa medo medo asthi asthi majja majja śukrāṇi Sukrani dhātava: dhatava: || sapta sapta dūṣyā: disya: malā: mala: mūtra mitra śakṛt sakrt svedādayo’pi svedadayo’pi ca ca ||| Body Body tissues tissues and and waste waste products products are are called called as as Dushyas. Dushyas. Means, Means, there there are are influenced, influenced, and and affected affected by by Doshas. Doshas. Body Body tissues tissues are are -- Page Page No. No. 5 5 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 1. 1. INA RYWYN 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Rasa the first Rasa - -the first product product of of digestion, digestion, Soon Soon after after digestion digestion of of food, food, the the digested digested food food turns turns into into Rasa. Rasa. It It is is grossly grossly compared compared to to lymph lymph or or plasma. plasma. But But it it is is not not aa complete complete comparison. comparison. Rakta Rakta —– Also Also called called as as Asruk. Asruk. – — Blood Blood Mamsa Mamsa —– Muscle Muscle Meda Fat tissue Meda -- Fat tissue Asthi Asthi -- Bones Bones and and cartilages cartilages Majja Majja -- Bone Bone marrow marrow Shukra Shukra —– Semen Semen // Ovum Ovum or or entire entire male male and and female female genital genital tract tract and and its its secretions secretions are are grossly grossly covered covered under under this this heading. heading. Mala waste products Mala —–waste products Shakrut Shakrut // Pureesha Pureesha —– (faeces), (faeces), Sweda Sweda (sweat) (sweat) and and Mootra Mootra (urine) (urine) are are the the three three waste waste products products of of the the body. body. 13.5 13.5 Nature Nature of of increase increase and and decrease decrease व वपर तै: facta: वपयय: ।| ae: wart: : सवषां wdst faatta: ृ : समानै vṛddhi: vrddhi: samānai: samanai: sarveṣāṃ sarvesam viparītai: viparitai: viparyaya: viparyaya: || Equal Equal qualities qualities lead lead to to increase, increase, and and opposing opposing qualities qualities lead lead to to decrease. decrease. For For example, example, dryness dryness is is the the quality quality of of Vata. Vata. If Ifaa Vata Vata body body type type person person exposes exposes himself himself to to dry dry cold cold weather, weather, his his dryness dryness and and in in turn turn Vata Vata will will increase, increase, leading leading to to dry dry skin. skin. In In the the same same way, way, oiliness oiliness is is opposite opposite quality quality of of dryness. dryness. If If he he applies applies oil oil to to the the skin, skin, then then the the dryness dryness and and related related Vata Vata is is decreased. decreased. 13.5 13.5 Six Six tastes tastes रसाः वा व ललवण त तोषणकषायकाःष TE: FACIFAAAAFA MIMS S यमा ता ते च GeUATAAeA T यथाप BAI ूव बलावहाः Teraer: Svadu Salt, Tikta Svadu – — Madhura Madhura – — sweet, sweet, Amla Amla – — Sour, Sour, Lavana Lavana – — Salt, Tikta – — Bitter, Bitter, Ushna Ushna – — Katu Katu – — Pungent, Pungent, Kashaya Kashaya – — Astringent Astringent are are the the six six types types of of Rasa. Rasa. They They are are successively successively lower lower in in energy. energy. That That means, means, Sweet Sweet taste taste imparts imparts maximum maximum energy energy to to body body and and the the astringent, astringent, the the least. least. 14. 14. Effect Effect of of tastes tastes on on Tridosha Tridosha TCA Aa तं tafedt HHA ् ।| त ा या मा नि त TI: य: Aras: त तादय: कफम कषाय त त मध प तम ये aत ु क aure fart wen:रु ा: Actes Has ु वते ॥I tatrādyā tatradya mārutaṃ marutam ghnanti ghnanti traya: traya: tiktādaya: tiktadaya: kapham kapham || kaṣāya kasaya tikta tikta madhurā: madhura: pittamanye pittamanye tu tu kurvate kurvate ||| In In the the list list of of tastes, tastes, the the first first three, three, i.e. i.e. Sweet, Sweet, sour sour and and salt salt mitigates mitigates Vata Vata and and increases increases Kapha. Kapha. The The last last three, three, i.e. i.e. bitter, bitter, pungent pungent and and astringent astringent tastes tastes mitigates mitigates Kapha Kapha and and increases increases Vata Vata Astringent, Astringent, bitter bitter and and sweet sweet taste taste mitigates mitigates Pitta. Pitta. Sour, Sour, salt salt and and pungent pungent tastes tastes increase increase Pitta. Pitta. Page Page No. No. 6 6 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Types Types of of food food substances: substances: Shamana Shamana —– Food Food that that brings brings down down the the increased increased Dosha Dosha to to normalcy normalcy Kopana Kopana – — Food Food that that increases increases the the lowered lowered Dosha Dosha to to normalcy normalcy Swasthahita Swasthahita -- Food Food that that maintains maintains the the normalcy normalcy of of Tridosha Tridosha and and health. health. Types Types of of Potency Potency (Veerya) (Veerya) Ushna Ushna veerya veerya (Hot (Hot potency) potency) -Some -Some food food items items are are hot hot in in nature. nature. For For example example pepper pepper Sheeta Sheeta veerya veerya (cold (cold potency) potency) -- Some Some food food items items are are cold cold in in nature. nature. For For example example milk. milk. These These are are the the two two types types of of potencies. potencies. Generally, Generally, substances substances that that have have Astringent, Astringent, bitter bitter and and sweet sweet tastes tastes are are coolant coolant in in nature nature and and Sour, Sour, salt salt and and pungent pungent tastes tastes are are hot hot in in nature. nature. Three Three types types of of Vipaka Vipaka Vipaka Vipaka refers refers to to conversion conversion of of taste taste after after initial initial phase phase of of digestion. digestion. e Madhura Madhura Vipaka Vipaka (sweet) (sweet) – — Generally, Generally, Sweet, Sweet, and and salt salt tastes tastes undergo undergo this this Vipaka. Vipaka. e Amla Amla Vipaka Vipaka (Sour) (Sour) – — Sour Sour taste taste undergoes undergoes this this Vipaka Vipaka e __ Katu rest of Katu Vipaka Vipaka -–rest of the the tastes tastes —– Bitter, Bitter, astringent astringent and and pungent pungent tastes tastes undergo undergo this this Vipaka. Vipaka. 18. 18. —– Twenty Twenty types types of of qualities qualities ग हम िTetser न ध Cole ल ण Ales सा म थरा: ।| ग ण वशदा: faerie: वंश त: स वपयया: ॥I Teु मHeeद fen Agदृ ु िfea: aon: aaea w fava: ु ा: सस ू म fare: guru guru manda manda hima hima snigdha snigdha ślakṣṇa slaksna sāndra sandra mṛdu mrdu sthirā: sthira: || guṇā: guna: sasūkṣma sastiksma viśadā: visada: viṃśati: vimsati: sa sa viparyayā: viparyaya: ||| Guru(heavy) Guru(heavy) X X laghu laghu (light (light in in weight) weight) Manda(slow) tiksna(quick,fast) Manda(slow) X X tiksna(quick, fast) Hima Hima (cold) (cold) X X ushna ushna (hot) (hot) Snighda Snighda (unctuous) (unctuous) X X ruksa ruksa (dry) (dry) Slaksna Slaksna (smooth) (smooth) X X khara khara (rough) (rough) Sandra Sandra (solid) (solid) X X drava drava (liquid) (liquid) Mrdu Mrdu (soft) (soft) X X kathina kathina (hard) (hard) Sthira Sthira (stable) (stable) X X cala cala (moving, (moving, unstable) unstable) Suksma Suksma (stable, (stable, small) small) X X sthula sthula (big,gross) (big, gross) Vishada Vishada (non (non slimy) slimy) X X picchila picchila (slimy) (slimy) 19. 19. Cause Cause for for health health and and disease: disease: कालाथकमणां sey योगो gefaeataasn: ह न म या तमा क: ।| eases स य योग च faaat व ेयो temirete रोगारो यैक SR कारणम|I ्॥ ares kālārthakarmaṇāṃ kalarthakarmanam yogo yogo hīnamithyātimātraka: hinamithyatimatraka: || samyagyogaśca samyagyogasca vijñeyo vijiieyo rogārogyaika rogarogyaika kāraṇam karanam ||| Less, Less, more more or or wrong wrong unison unison of of time, time, senses senses and and functions functions is is the the reason reason for for disease disease and and the the right right unison unison of of these these three three factors factors is is the the reason reason for for health. health. (Explained (Explained detail detail in in further further chapters). chapters). Page Page No. No. 77 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 20. 20. Definition Definition of of health health and and disease disease रोग तु ayayes दोषवैष यं दोष ward aly सा Uesयं अरोगता ania ।| rogastu rogastu doṣavaiṣamyaṃ dosavaisamyam doṣa dosa sāmyaṃ samyam arogatā arogata || Imbalance Imbalance in in Tridosha Tridosha is is disease. disease. Perfect Perfect balance balance is is health. health. 21. 21. Types Types of of disease: disease: नजाग त ु faster वभागेन at त रोगा वधा cya: मत fetoisied Var afer ृ ाः Nija Nija roga roga – — Disease Disease caused caused due due to to imbalance imbalance in in internal internal factors. factors. For For example, example, eating eating excessive excessive hot hot substances, substances, leading leading to to gastritis. gastritis. Agantu Agantu Roga Roga -- Disease Disease caused caused due due to to external external factors. factors. Such Such as as injuries. injuries. Both Both these these types types of of disease disease can can occur occur to to body body and and mind. mind. 21. 21. Types Types of of mental mental Doshas Doshas – — ते दाद ध ठानाम प aaIaraaed वधारज तम च मनसो ATषां कायमनोमे HaAeAACTaAsoenay Acta eatवौ च a दोषाव arsrqatectt ुदा तौ Rajas Rajas —– quality quality of of mind, mind, that that drives drives us us to to take take actions, actions, Tamas that leads Tamas —–that leads to to inaction inaction and and lethargy lethargy 22. 22. How How to to test test patient? patient? दशन पशन नैः Tatar पर े त च रो गणम ् agereagreraeet: a Vero Darshana Darshana – — by by means means of of inspection, inspection, observation. observation. Sparshana Sparshana -- by by means means ofof touching touching Prashna Prashna – — by by means means ofof asking asking 23. 23. Examination Examination of of disease: disease: रोगं नदान त भः Wat Pore TAMTEा LTपू लATOणोपशयाि TATA: Disease Disease should should be be examined examined by by its its Nidana Nidana -causes, -causes, aetiology, aetiology, Pragrupa Pragrupa —– Purvarupa Purvarupa —– prodromal prodromal symptoms, symptoms, premonitory premonitory symptoms symptoms Lakshana Lakshana —– Specific Specific signs signs and and symptoms, symptoms, clinical clinical features features Upashayaa diagnostic tests Upashayaa —–diagnostic tests Apti Apti—– Samprapti Samprapti—– Pathogenesis. Pathogenesis. Types Types of of Habitat Habitat (Desha) (Desha) भ शमाहु रह afaeroansae वधाजा गलं Aa वातभू य ठमन बण साधारणं THA सममलं HAcerrcd aaghe OAT ूपं तJ ु कफो HAMCIIFATI ू मदे ह भेदेन दे PTधा भ sTeeranie srत ् ूदेशमा दशे In In this this science, science, is is said said to to be be of of two two kinds kinds -- Bhumi Bhumi desha desha —– region region of of land land and and Dehadesha Dehadesha —– the the body. body. Bhumi Bhumi desa desa -- land land region region is is of of three three kinds kinds of of viz, viz, Jangala – arid or Jangala -which -which is is predominant predominant of of vata vata—arid or desert-like desert-like land land with with no no mountains mountains or or hills, hills, has has less less vegetation, vegetation, poor poor water water resourses resourses and and is is more more breezy. breezy. Anupa Anupa- - which which is is predominant predominant of of kapha kapha -- marshy marshy land land with with more more of of water, water, more more vegetation vegetation ,, very very less less of of sunlight sunlight and and heat. heat. Sadharana hills, Sadharana which which has has all all Tridosha Tridosha in in balance balance -- moderate moderate type type with with few few mountains mountains , ,hills, moderate moderate water, water, vegetation vegetation and and sunlight. sunlight. Page Page No. No. 8 8 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Kinds Kinds of of time: time: णा द या यव था go च Alel कालो AभेषaATHA जयोगकृत ् aUnigcaeaaen Two Two kinds kinds are are consideredconsidered- one one is is normal normal time, time, another another – — stages stages of of diseases. diseases. 25-26 25-26 Types Types of of medicines: medicines: शोधनं वधा ॥i शर रजानां arson दोषाणां HAUT मेण GATT परमौषधम ् ।| ् औषधं afaen Meet शमनं WAT चे Ufaत समासात FAN steer whore बि वरे को aaet वमनं तथा afta:त: faret aa तै detल घ ydत AY: ु: ॥Il ृ ं मध śodhanaṃ Sodhanam śamanaṃ Samanam ceti ceti samāsāt samasat auṣadhaṃ ausadham dvidhā dvidha ||| śarīrajānāṃ Sarirajanam doṣāṇāṃ dosanam krameṇa kramena paramauṣadham paramausadham || basti: basti: vireko vireko vamanaṃ vamanam tathā tatha taila taila ghṛtaṃ ghrtam madhu: madhu: ||| There There are are two two types types of of medicines. medicines. 1. 1. Shamana Shamana -- Palliative Palliative treatment treatment —– which which brings brings the the Dosha Dosha to to normalcy, normalcy, useful useful in in initial initial stages stages of of diseases diseases 2. 2. Shodhana Shodhana —– Purification Purification treatment treatment – — which which expels expels imbalanced imbalanced Dosha Dosha out out of of body. body. – — Useful Useful in in aggravated aggravated stages stages of of diseases. diseases. Examples: Examples: For For Vata Vata —– Basti Basti (suppositories) (suppositories) is is the the Shodhana Shodhana treatment, treatment, and and oil oil is is Shamana Shamana treatment. treatment. For For pitta pitta – — Virechana Virechana (Purgation) (Purgation) is is Shodhana Shodhana and and Ghee Ghee is is Shamana. Shamana. For For Kapha Kapha —– Vamana Vamana (emesis) (emesis) is is Shodhana Shodhana and and Honey Honey is is Shamana. Shamana. 26. 26. Treatment Treatment for for mental mental imbalance: imbalance: धीधै या मा द व ानं मनोदोषौषधं ehetatearietaatet Aeilerstset परम oe] ् Dhee Dhee —– improving improving intelligence intelligence Dhairya Dhairya —– improving improving courage courage Atmavijnana Atmavijnana —– Self Self realization realization are are the the means means to to treat treat mental mental imbalance. imbalance. 27-29. 27-29. 16 16 factors factors of of treatment. treatment. -Chikitsa Chikitsa Chatushpada Chatushpada भषग ् या युप थाता रोगी पादचतु टयम ् च क सत य न द टं , येकं त चतुगणम ् ु -- Bhishag Bhishag (Doctor), (Doctor), Dravya Dravya (medicine), (medicine), Upastha Upastha (Nurse) (Nurse) and and Rogi Rogi (patient) (patient) are are the the four four factors factors in in treatment. treatment. Each Each of of these these four four have have further further four four qualities. qualities. Page Page No. No. 9 9 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Qualities Qualities of of doctor: doctor: द तशा ाथ esenat टकमा श aa: ः तीथा cetcaenearat afafatra ु च भषक Daksha Alert, disciplined Daksha —–Alert, disciplined Shastra Shastra —– Having Having detailed detailed knowledge knowledge about about diseases diseases and and treatment. treatment. Drushtakarma Drushtakarma —– Having Having practical practical experience experience Shuchi Shuchi— – Cleanliness Cleanliness Qualities Qualities of of medicine: medicine: बहुक पं बहु गण ु ं संप नं यो यमौषधम ् Bahukalpa Bahukalpa —– Ability Ability to to formulate formulate in in different different dosage dosage forms, forms, like like decoction, decoction, powder, powder, herbal herbal oil oil etc etc Bahuguna Bahuguna —– Having Having enormous enormous qualities qualities Sampanna Sampanna —– Endowed Endowed with with virtues virtues Yogya Yogya -- suitable suitable and and appropriate appropriate for for specific specific diseases. diseases. Qualities Qualities of of nurse: nurse: अन रु तः श रचारकः HRA: Utsea GeAtel Wa: ु चद ो ब ु मान ् प Anurakta Anurakta —– Compassion Compassion towards towards patients patients Shuchi Shuchi —– Cleanliness Cleanliness Daksha Alert, active Daksha —–Alert, active Buddhiman Intelligence Buddhiman —–Intelligence Qualities Qualities of of patient patient आ यो Veit रोगी real भष व यो ATT: ापकः Aecaret स वानhtप 3Teat Adya Adya -- Rich Rich Bhishagvashya Bhishagvashya —– 100 100 % % obedience obedience towards towards doctor doctor Jnapaka Jnapaka —– Good Good memory memory Satvavaan Satvavaan —– Having Having good good strength strength to to tolerate tolerate disease disease and and treatment. treatment. Types Types of of diseases: diseases: areatयो असा srarertय इsftत carferdfaen ct त dq ु पyachaargares: Pesaeaea, Acaयो य BeaचानुपUsHA: सा या ध वधा तौ न वधासुसा यः क मः ु ृ सा य च, या Two Two main main types, types, which which are are further further divided divided into into two two types. types. Sadhya Sadhya -- Which Which can can be be cured. cured. It It is is of of two two types types – — Easy Easy to to cure cure (Sukha (Sukha Sadhya), Sadhya), Difficult Difficult to to cure cure (Krichra (Krichra Sadhya) Sadhya) Page Page No. No. 10 10 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Asadhya Asadhya -- Which Which can can not not be be cured. cured. It It is is of of two two types types – — Yapya Yapya (medicine (medicine is is required required for for as as long long as as patient patient is is alive), alive), Anupakrama Anupakrama (nothing (nothing can can be be done. done. )) Qualities Qualities of of diseases diseases which which can can be be cured cured easily: easily: सव षध मे oe दे हे य िजता मनःअममगो पहे व aateerert Fat:ूनः पTarंस HAAM अ HeTecAT ु ो Prccrea प पो BIST HITT HGALACGAPIA: TVET ATT ACAH ATTA aI: GT अनुप वःअतु यद ू यदे शत ु कृ तः पादस प द हे वनुगन ु े वेकदोषमाग नवः सुखः Sarvaushadha patient is Sarvaushadha kshame kshame dehe dehe —– The The body body ofofpatient is able able to to tolerate tolerate all all types types of of medicines medicines Yunaha Yunaha —– Young Young patient patient Jitatmanaha Patient having Jitatmanaha —–Patient having good good control control over over sense sense organs, organs, who who follows follows abstinence abstinence Amarmaga Amarmaga —–IfIf the the disease disease is is not not affected affected sensitive sensitive areas areas like like brain, brain, heart, heart, kidney kidney Alpahetu Alpahetu —–IfIf the the cause cause for for disease disease is is mild mild Alparoopa Alparoopa —– Mild Mild symptoms symptoms Anupadrava Anupadrava —– no no complications complications Atulya – If the Dosha Atulya dushya dushya desha desha rutu rutu prakruti prakruti-— Ifthe Dosha involved, involved, Dhatu Dhatu (body (body tissue) tissue) involved, involved, Desha Desha (place), (place), Rutu Rutu (season) (season) and and Prakruti Prakruti (body (body type) type) are are not not influenced influenced by by one one particular particular Dosha, Dosha, Pada Pada sampadi sampadi -- If If all all the the sixteen sixteen qualities qualities of of Doctor, Doctor, patient patient etc etc explained explained above above are are present, present, Graha Graha anuguna anuguna -- IfIf astrology astrology is is in in favour favour of of the the patient patient Eka Eka Doshaja Doshaja -- Disease Disease due due to to only only one one Dosha Dosha Eka Eka Marga Marga -- If If only only one one body body channel channel is is affected affected Nava Nava -- Disease Disease of of recent recent origin origin // onset. onset. 32. 32. qualities qualities of of difficult-to-treat difficult-to-treat diseases diseases श ा दसाधनः क ष वादायुषो या या यासा वपयये eaeMsa: Pes: AHकरे च T ततो ddl गदःशे Ta:Mcqdaywy sey:यः पqeasgrnafarsy ृ ः स अन प HATHA Ud ु म एव याि थतो अ य त वपययेऔ सु यमोहार तकृ GSCTEY द ु ट र टो अ नाशनः CAAA HeseaareAasicqasAeNrape HaTeAet: Disease Disease which which require require the the use use of of sharp sharp instruments instruments etc. etc. in in treatment treatment .. and and also also those those which which have have mixture mixture of of factors factors enumerated enumerated in in previous previous verses verses are are krcchra krechra sadhya sadhya (curable (curable with with difficulty difficulty ). ). Diseases Diseases which which have have features features entirely entirely opposite opposite of of curable curable diseases, diseases, which which have have stayed stayed for for long long period period of of time, time, involving involving all all the the important important tissues tissues and and vital vital organs, organs, which which have have produced produced anxiety anxiety (fear (fear of of death), death), delusion delusion and and restlessness; restlessness; which which are are presenting presenting fatal fatal signs signs and and which which causes causes loss loss of of sense sense organs organs are are impossible impossible to to cure. cure. (Anupakrama (Anupakrama ), ), which which require require no no therapy, therapy, fit fit to to be be rejected, rejected, sure sure to to cause cause death. death. 33. 33. Patient Patient worth worth rejection: rejection: येजेदात भष भूपै व टं तेषां कृत नं वै यमा ननम ् वषं वष ह नोपकरणं य म वधेयं गतायुष च डं शोकातुरं भी ं The The physician physician should should reject reject the the patient, patient, who who is is hated hated by by physician physician and and the the king king and and who who hates hates them; them; who who hates hates himself himself (dejected (dejected in in life), life), who who is is not not having having the the equipments equipments and and other other facilities facilities required required for for treatment, treatment, who who is is busy busy with with other other activities, activities, not not having having the the required required attention, attention, leisure leisure etc. etc. towards towards the the treatment, treatment, who who is is disobedient disobedient (to (to the the physician), physician), whose whose life life is is coming coming to to an an end, end, who who is is of of evil evil mind mind (violent, (violent, destructive), destructive), who who is is afflicted afflicted with with great great grief, grief, who who is is full full of of fear, fear, who who is is ungrateful ungrateful and and who who thinks thinks himself himself to to be be aa physician physician (in (in respect respect of of deciding deciding drug, drug, therapies, therapies, food, food, activities activities etc) etc) . . Page Page No. No. 11 11 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan List List of of other other chapters. chapters. TARR WH ् चातो Ul वaeyd HeIRASIE: त ा या य परम यते अ यायस हः I. I. SUTRASTHANA SUTRASTHANA आयु काम दन वह हारोगानु पादन याःअ न ाना नसं र ामा ा क या युप माःशु धः श य व धः श यरसा याःदोषा द ानत वेदति च या द नेह वेदरे का थापननावन धूम ग डूष ाराि नक मकौसू तान ममे अ यायाि से कतिृ तय कश कि शरा व श ं त् Re eK eRe Be WNHNNNNNNNND CO TDOAWAAIDAHRWNK SOANDNBHWNRF wo CADMABWNK 1.. Ayuskamiya Ayuskamiya adhyaya adhyaya (desire (desire for for long long life). life). 2.. Dinacarya Dinacarya adhyaya adhyaya (daily (daily regimen). regimen). 3.. Rtucarya Rtucarya adhyaya adhyaya (seasonal (seasonal regimen). regimen). 4.. Roganutpadaniya Roganutpadaniya adhyaya adhyaya (prevention (prevention of of diseases). diseases). 5.. Dravadravya Dravadravya vijnaniya vijnaniya adhyaya adhyaya (knowledge (knowledge of of liquid liquid materials). materials). 6.. Annasvarupa Annasvarupa vijnaniya vijnaniya adhyaya adhyaya (nature (nature of of food food materials). materials). 7.. Annaraksadhyaya Annaraksadhyaya (Protection (Protection of of foods). foods). 8.. Matrasitiyadhyaya Matrasitiyadhyaya (Proper (Proper quantity quantity of of food). food). 9.. Dravyadi Dravyadi vijnaniya vijnaniya adhyaya adhyaya (Knowledge (Knowledge of of substances substances etc.). etc.). 10.. Rasabhediya Rasabhediya adhyaya adhyaya (classification (classification of of tastes). tastes). 11.. Dosadi Dosadi vijnaniya vijnaniya adhyaya adhyaya (Knowledge (Knowledge of of dosas dosas etc.). etc.). 12.. Dosabhediya Dosabhediya adhyaya adhyaya (classification (classification of of dosas). dosas). 13.. Dosopakramaniya Dosopakramaniya adhyaya adhyaya (treatment (treatment of of the the dosas). dosas). 14.. Dvividhopakramaniya Dvividhopakramaniya adhyaya adhyaya (two (two kinds kinds of of treatments). treatments). 15.. Sodhanadigana Sodhanadigana sangraha sangraha adhyaya adhyaya (groups (groups of of drugs drugs for for purificatory purificatory therapies therapies etc.). etc.). 16.. Sneha Sneha vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (oleation (oleation therapy). therapy). 17.. Svedavidhi Svedavidhi adhyaya adhyaya (sudation (sudation therapy). therapy). 18.. Vamana Vamana virecana virecana vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (emesis (emesis and and purgation purgation therapies). therapies). 19.. Basti Basti vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (enema (enema therapy). therapy). 20.. Nasya Nasya vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (nasal (nasal medication). medication). 21.. Dhumapana Dhumapana vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (inhalation (inhalation of of smoke smoke therapy). therapy). 22.. Gandusadi Gandusadi vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (mouth (mouth gargles gargles and and other other therapies). therapies). 23.. Ascyotana-anjana Ascyotana-anjana vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (eye (eye drops, drops, collyrium collyrium therapies). therapies). 24.. Tarpana-putapaka Tarpana-putapaka vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (satiating (satiating the the eye eye and and other other therapies). therapies). 25.. Yantra Yantra vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (use (use of of blunt blunt instruments). instruments). 26.. Sastra Sastra vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (use (use of of sharp sharp instruments). instruments). 27.. Siravyadha Siravyadha vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (venesection). (venesection). 28.. Salyaharana Salyaharana vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (removal (removal of of foreign foreign bodies). bodies). 29.. Sastrakarma Sastrakarma vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (surgical (surgical operation). operation). 30.. Ksaragnikarma Ksaragnikarma vidhi vidhi adhyaya adhyaya (alkaline (alkaline and and thermal thermal cautery). cautery). Page Page No. No. 12 12 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan II. Il. SARIRA SARIRA STHANA STHANA (SECTION (SECTION ON ON ANATOMY, ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY PHYSIOLOGY ETC). ETC). शार रम3 ु यतेगaaHie भाव ाि तत गममा वभा गकि वक तदतजं ष ठम4 ् Uta dda. यापद eSATA HieIHiagdst Tor ू + ct ृ 1. 1. Garbhavakranti Garbhavakranti sarira sarira (embryology). (embryology). 2. 2. Garbhavyapad Garbhavyapad sarira sarira (disorders (disorders of of pregnancy). pregnancy). 3. 3. Anga Anga vibhaga vibhaga sarira sarira (different (different parts parts of of the the body). body). 4. 4. Marma Marma vibhaga vibhaga sarira sarira (classification (classification of of vital vital spots). spots). 5. 5. Vikrti Vikrti vijnaniya vijnaniya sarira sarira (knowledge (knowledge of of bad bad prognosis). prognosis). 6. 6. Dutadi Dutadi vijnaniya vijnaniya sarira sarira (knowledge (knowledge of of messenger messenger etc.). etc.). III. IH. NIDANA NIDANA STHANA STHANA (DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSIS OF OF DISEASES): DISEASES): नदानं ATA सावरो गक दमदा यश तसा feleTet HES वरासFAT AATमा CASA AROरणा ृ वासय चपा डुकु ठा नलातानां वाता aspartate TART य च T षोडशा Se मू ाघात मेहाणां FAS व या ATABTON ATE यALEA ुदर य CNADMAHPWNK 1.. Sarvroga Sarvroga nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of diseases diseases in in general). general). 2.. Jvara Jvara nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of fever). fever). 3.. Raktapitta, Raktapitta, Kasa Kasa nidanam nidanam (disease (disease and and cough). cough). 4.. Svasa-Hidhma Svasa-Hidhma nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of bleeding bleeding disease disease and and cough). cough). 5.. Rajayaksmadi Rajayaksmadi nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of pulmonary pulmonary tuberculosis tuberculosis etc.). etc.). 6.. Madatyaya Madatyaya nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of alcoholic alcoholic intoxication). intoxication). 7.. Arsas Arsas nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of haemorrhoids). haemorrhoids). 8.. Atisara-Grahani Atisara-Grahani nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of diarrhoea diarrhoea and and duodenal duodenal disorders). disorders). 9. 9. Mutraghata Mutraghata nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of retention retention of of urine). urine). 10. 10. Prameha Prameha nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of diabetes). diabetes). 11. 11. Vidradhi-Vrddhi-Gulma Vidradhi-Vrddhi-Gulma nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of abscess, abscess, enlargement enlargement of of the the scrotum scrotum and and abdominal abdominal tumour). tumour). 12. 12. Udara Udara nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen). abdomen). 13. 13. Panduroga-sopha-visarpa Panduroga-sopha-visarpa nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of anaemia, anaemia, dropsy dropsy and and herpes). herpes). 14. 14. Kustha-svitra-krimi Kustha-svitra-krimi nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of leprosy, leprosy, leucoderma leucoderma and and parasites). parasites). 15. 15. Vata Vata vyadhi vyadhi nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of diseases diseases of of the the nervous nervous system). system). 16. 16. Vatasonita Vatasonita nidanam nidanam (diagnosis (diagnosis of of gout). gout). IV. IV. CIKITSITA CIKITSITA STHANA STHANA (THERAPEUTICS): (THERAPEUTICS): च कि सतं sat वरे ted र ते eared वासे amet कासे च म णवामौ मदा यये aiet-q, अशःसु, tater व श eat, वौ, cat वौ च fateicud o य geattrarat wercad a म च कि सत वा वंश त रमे Ardea qortorgeipieatyporaniracataaey ू ते व धौ ग ु मजठरपा डुशोफ वस पषुकु ठि व ा नल या धवाता ेषु fafairrdeariaerara अ यायाः SHEATAT: 1. 1. Jvara Jvara cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of fevers). fevers). 2. 2. Raktapitta Raktapitta cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of bleeding bleeding disease).3. disease).3. Kasa Kasa cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of cough). cough). 4. 4. Svasa-Hidhma Svasa-Hidhma cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of dyspnoea dyspnoea and and hiccup). hiccup). 5. 5. Rajayaksmadi Rajayaksmadi cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of pul. pul. tuberculosis, tuberculosis, etc.). etc.). 6. 6. Chardi-Hrdroga-Trsna Chardi-Hrdroga-Trsna cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of vomiting, vomiting, heart heart disease disease and and thirst). thirst). 7. 7. Madatyaya Madatyaya cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of alcoholic alcoholic intoxication). intoxication). Page Page No. No. 13 13 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 8. 8. Arsas Arsas cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of haemorrhoids). haemorrhoids). 9. 9. Atisara Atisara cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of diarrhoea). diarrhoea). 10. 10. Grahani Grahani dosa dosa cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of duodenal duodenal disorder). disorder). 11. 11. Mutraghata Mutraghata cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of retention retention of of urine). urine). 12. 12. Prameha Prameha cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of diabetes). diabetes). 13. 13. Vidradhi-vrddhi Vidradhi-vrddhi cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of abscess, abscess, enlargement enlargement of of the the scrotum). scrotum). 14. 14. Gulma Gulma cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of abdominal abdominal tumour). tumour). 15. 15. Udara Udara cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen). abdomen). 16. 16. Pandu Pandu roga roga cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of anaemia). anaemia). 17. 17. Svayathu Svayathu (sopha) (sopha) cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of dropsy). dropsy). 18. 18. Visarpa Visarpa cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of herpes). herpes). 19. 19. Kustha Kustha cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of leprosy). leprosy). 20. 20. Svitra-krimi Svitra-krimi cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of leucoderma leucoderma and and parasites). parasites). 21. 21. Vata Vata vyadhi vyadhi cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of the the nervous nervous system). system). 22. 22. Vatasonita Vatasonita cikitsita cikitsita (treatment (treatment of of gout). gout). V. V. KALPASIDDHI KALPASIDDHI STHANA STHANA (PURIFICATORY (PURIFICATORY RECIPES, RECIPES, PHARMACEUTICS): PHARMACEUTICS): क प स रतः Weed पर क पो aatfetnes वमो वरे क य afeatadeancweantarasecamel ति स बि तक पना स ब यापदां Veal ष ठो geared: यक पः Houtatd: 1. 1. Vamana Vamana kalpa kalpa (emetic (emetic recipes). recipes). 2. 2. Virecana Virecana kalpa kalpa (purgative (purgative recipes). recipes). 3. 3. Vamana Vamana virecana virecana vyapat vyapat siddhi siddhi (management (management of of complications complications of of emesis emesis and and purgation purgation therapies). therapies). 4. 4. Basti Basti kalpa kalpa (enema (enema recipes). recipes). 5. 5. Basti Basti vyapat vyapat siddhi siddhi (management (management of of complications complications of of enema enema therapy). therapy). 6. 6. Dravya-kalpa Dravya-kalpa (pharmaceutics). (pharmaceutics). VI. VI. UTTARASTHANA: UTTARASTHANA: अत Soar उ तर बालोपचारे aacareat त याधौ aaa, त हे , at वौ चwT sersrare भूतगेउ मादे sx अथ Tafaarel, म ृ त ंशो, qat वौ qat वौ acy व मसु Hed सं धषु तमो ल गनाशे षु aeyeraatersaraeyy यो, aat वौ aat वौ च सवगे कणनासामुख शरो णे , भ दरे यादौ Fat, a Aaa, Asaगे भग Haeataeearat ु रोगेषु TER ग ु यरोगे प थ वयि वषे sors भज क टे षु Avy मु के षु Casetdcahal रसायनेच वा रंशो HTM अनप यानाम ु गे Hey ay yurcaaieay aTACAयायो ृ बीजपोषणः SrstarSuT: \o OCADMNABWNK 1.. Balopacaraniya Balopacaraniya adhyaya adhyaya (care (care of of the the new new born born baby). baby). 2.. Balamaya Balamaya pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of children). children). 3.. Balagraha Balagraha pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of evil evil spirits). spirits). 4.. Bhuta Bhuta vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of demons). demons). 5.. Bhuta Bhuta pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of demons). demons). 6.. Unmada Unmada pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of insanity). insanity). 7.. Apasmara Apasmara pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of epilepsy). epilepsy). 8.. Vartma Vartma roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of diseases diseases of of eyelids). eyelids). 9.. Vartma Vartma roga roga pratsedha pratsedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of eyelids). eyelids). 10. 10. Sandhisitasita Sandhisitasita roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of diseases diseases of of fornices, fornices, sclera sclera and and cornea). cornea). 11. 11. Sandhisitasita Sandhisitasita roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of fornices, fornices, sclera sclera and and cornea). cornea). Page Page No. No. 14 14 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 12. 12. Drsti Drsti roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of diseases diseases of of vision). vision). 13. 13. Timira Timira pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of blindness). blindness). 14. 14. Linganasa Linganasa pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of blindness). blindness). 15. 15. Sarvaksi Sarvaksi roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of diseases diseases of of the the whole whole eye). eye). 16. 16. Sarvaksi Sarvaksi roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of the the whole whole eye). eye). 17. 17. Karna Karna roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of diseases diseases of of the the ear). ear). 18. 18. Karna Karna roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of the the ear). ear). 19. 19. Nasa Nasa roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of the the diseases diseases of of the the nose). nose). 20. 20. Nasa Nasa roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of the the nose). nose). 21. 21. Mukha Mukha roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of the the diseases diseases of of the the mouth). mouth). 22. 22. Mukha Mukha roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of the the mouth). mouth). 23. 23. Siro Siro roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of the the diseases diseases of of head). head). 24. 24. Siro Siro roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of the the head). head). 25. 25. Vrana Vrana pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of ulcers). ulcers). 26. 26. Sadyo Sadyo vrana vrana pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of traumatic traumatic wounds). wounds). 27. 27. Bhanga Bhanga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of fractures). fractures). 28. 28. Bhagandara Bhagandara pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of rectal rectal fistula) fistula) 29. 29. Granthi-arbuda-slipada-apaci-nadi Granthi-arbuda-slipada-apaci-nadi vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of tumours, tumours, cancers, cancers, filariasis, filariasis, scrofula scrofula and and sinus sinus ulcer). ulcer). 30. 30. Granthyadi Granthyadi pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of tumours tumours etc.). etc.). 31. 31. Ksudra Ksudra roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of minor minor diseases). diseases). 32. 32. Ksudra Ksudra roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of minor minor diseases). diseases). 33. 33. Guhya Guhya roga roga vijnaniya vijnaniya (knowledge (knowledge of of diseases diseases of of genital genital organs). organs). 34. 34. Guhya Guhya roga roga pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of diseases diseases of of genital genital organs). organs). 35. 35. Visa Visa pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of poisoning). poisoning). 36. 36. Sarpa Sarpa visa visa pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of snake snake bite bite poison). poison). 37. 37. Kitalutadi Kitalutadi visa visa pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of poison poison of of insects, insects, spiders spiders etc.). etc.). 38. 38. Musika-alarka Musika-alarka visa visa pratisedha pratisedha (treatment (treatment of of poison poison of of mouse, mouse, rabid, rabid, dog dog etc.). etc.). 39. 39. Rasayana Rasayana vidhi vidhi (rejuvination (rejuvination therapy). therapy). 40. 40. Vajikarana Vajikarana vidhi vidhi (virilification (virilification therapy). therapy). इ य यायशतं er वंशं ष थानै द रतम ् saemeaed wsiR:भः TactedtRaA End End of of first first chapter chapter of of Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hridayam. Hridayam. Page Page No. No. 15 15 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter 2: 2: Dinacharya Dinacharya feeraat Daily Routine Routine Chapter दनचया Daily This This is is the the second second Chapter Chapter of of Ahstanga Ahstanga Hrudaya Hrudaya Sutrasthana Sutrasthana – — Called Called as as Dinacharya Dinacharya – — Ayurvedic Ayurvedic daily daily routine. routine. Dina Dina means means daily, daily, Charya Charya means means – — regimen/routine. regimen/routine. This This chapter chapter covers covers mental, mental, speech speech and and physical physical aspects aspects of of well well being, being, that that you you should should follow follow every every day. day. 1. 1. PRATARUTHANA PRATARUTHANA/ / GETTING GETTING UP UP IN IN THE THE MORNING MORNING ा मे Hed मुहूत BTeaSOcEAE: उि 3ieassceaeat त ठे व थो रwaaay ाथमायुषः: TEA Healthy Healthy person person should should get get up up from from bed bed at at Brahmi Brahmi Muhurtha. Muhurtha. That That is, is, before before dawn, dawn, or or around around 45 45 minutes – 6 am. from 33 am minutes before before Sun Sun rise, rise, around around 5 5—6 am. Last Last three three hours hours of of the the night night – — from am to to 6 6 am am – — isis known known as as brahma brahma muhurta. muhurta. 2-3 2-3 -– DANTADHAVANA DANTADHAVANA // CLEANING CLEANING OF OF TEETH TEETH शर र च तां facet नव य क nkfed paisa: ृ तशौच व ध ततः अक ोधख OLA दरकरCaaTPHsyleskA जकक The य TMA ¥ ु भा दजमL ् ातभ2 ु c वा च मesृ व ं कषायकट ु त तकम+ ् a 2 कनी य सम थौ eaयं WT गुणं Sse वादशा गल pA UTAH esayory ु म् भ ये तपवनं Secale द तमांसा Gael यबाधयन Teerddel aer ् Keeping Keeping in in view, view, the the condition condition of of his his body, body, the the individual individual should should pass pass urine urine and and faeces, faeces, clean clean teeth teeth with with any any of of the the twigs twigs of of following following herbs herbs – — Arka procera), Arka (Calotropis (Calotropis procera), Vata Vata (Ficus (Ficus benghalensis), benghalensis), Khadira Khadira (Acacia (Acacia catechu), catechu), Karanja pinnata), Karanja (Pongamia (Pongamia pinnata), Kakubha Kakubha (Terminalia (Terminalia arjuna). arjuna). To To use use the the twig twig as as tooth tooth brush, brush, the the thickness thickness of of the the twig twig should should be be approximately approximately equal equal to to the the tip tip of little of one’s one’s little little finger. finger. It It should should be be 12 12 Angula Angula length. length. The The tip tip of of the the twig twig should should be be chewed chewed a alittle to to make make itit as as brush. brush. The The twig twig should should be be of of astringent, astringent, pungent pungent and and bitter bitter in in taste. taste. 4. 4. Danta Danta Dhawana Dhawana Nishedha Nishedha – — Who Who should should not not brush brush teeth teeth -- ACUTE HOTAAY aT At ना यादजीणवमथु वासकास वरा दती त तत ् Pores: HAA च TD act ृ णा यपाक ने शरः कणमयी The The following following individuals individuals should should not not do do teeth teeth brushing. brushing. —– people people suffering suffering from from indigestion, indigestion, vomiting, vomiting, dyspnoea, dyspnoea, cough, cough, fever, fever, facial facial paralysis, paralysis, excessive excessive thirst, thirst, ulceration ulceration of of mouth, mouth, heart heart disease, disease, diseases diseases of of eyes, eyes, head head and and ears. ears. Page Page No. No. 16 16 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 5. 5. Anjana Anjana – — Collyrium Collyrium सौवीरम जनं न हतम णो ततो aot भजेत ् ।| च ु तेजोमयं are त य faerete वशेषात ् versal ले मतो Ha भयम Il ्॥ adrassrdt rcaयं eaAeviedal salecstas योजये सCANASEATA तरा ेऽ मात ् BTU ावणाथ THs रसा ate जनम |् । BSAA sauvīramañjanaṃ sauviramafjanam nityaṃ nityam hitamakṣṇostato hitamaksnostato bhajet bhajet | cakṣustejomayaṃ caksustejomayam tasya tasya viśeṣāt visesat śleṣmato Slesmato bhayam bhayam ||| yojayetsaptarātre’smāt yojayetsaptaratre’smat srāvaṇārthaṃ sravanartham rasāñjanam rasafijanam || It It is is good good to to apply apply a a special special type type of of collyrium collyrium called called Sauveera Sauveera Anjana Anjana to to the the eyes. eyes. It It should should be be applied Berberis aristata), applied daily. daily. Rasanjana Rasanjana (aqueous (aqueous extract extract of of Berberis aristata), should should be be applied applied once once in in aa week, week, to to drain drain out out Kapha Kapha (secretions) (secretions) from from the the eyes. eyes. 66 -- Navana Navana and and Gandusha Gandusha ततो AaeTTUSN नावनग डूषधAूमAKG ता बूलभाs aI भवे त ् Tal -- After After collyrium collyrium application, application, healthy healthy person person should should do do Navana Navana (Nasya (Nasya – — Nasal Nasal instillation instillation of of drops.). drops.). For For this this purpose, purpose, milk, milk, herbal herbal decoctions, decoctions, herbal herbal oils oils are are usually usually used. used. After After that, that, Gandusha Gandusha – — gargling gargling with with warm warm water, water, milk, milk, or or herbal herbal decoction decoction or or herbal herbal oil oil should should be be done. done. Then Then Dhuma Dhuma —– inhalation inhalation of of smoke smoke from from herbs herbs and and spices spices should should be be done, done, and and then then betel betel leaves leaves should should be be chewed. chewed. 77 –— Contra betel leaf Contra indication indication for for Tambula Tambula – — betel leaf chewing chewing —– ता बल त पता ो कुirपतच ुषाम ् TFGe ararwantep craaysry ू ं ata वषमू छामदातानामप यं शो षणाम प fasaearrerctearAyee eateoratey Those Those suffering suffering from from wounds, wounds, bleeding bleeding diseases, diseases, dryness, dryness, redness redness of of eye, eye, poisoning, poisoning, repeated repeated unconsciousness, unconsciousness, intoxication intoxication and and from from tuberculosis tuberculosis should should avoid avoid betel betel leaf leaf chewing. chewing. 8-9. 8-9. Abhyanga Abhyanga —– oil oil massage massage अ य गं AN आचरे त ् fees, न यं , स मवातहा ।| Ee ि ट Tale साद पSe आयु: स सु वक् areal दा यकृत ् HUST A जरा OT AAaTAST Yea ुि ट 31y: ु व न ArdH ॥fe: शर: sarraTay वणपादे षु तं वशेषेण शीलये य ऽ य ग: कफ थकृत सं शु अजी ण भ: ॥I Ft Taereor eforत ् ।| वdeutssaser: Stared Bets sofoiey: abhyaṅgaṃ jarā śramavātahā abhyangam ācaret acaret nityaṃ, nityam, sa sa jara Sramavataha | dṛṣṭi drsti prasāda prasada puṣṭi pusti āyu: ayu: susvapna susvapna sutvak sutvak dārḍhyakṛt dardhyakrt ||| śira: Sira: śravaṇapādeṣu Sravanapadesu taṃ tam viśeṣeṇa visesena śīlayet Silayet || varjyo’bhyaṅga: varjyo’bhyanga: kaphagrasthakṛta kaphagrasthakrta saṃśuddhi samsuddhi ajīrṇibhi: ajirnibhi: ||| Abhyanga Abhyanga means means massage. massage. It It should should be be done done daily, daily, morning. morning. It It delays delays ageing, ageing, relieves relieves tiredness tiredness and and excess excess of of Vata Vata (aches (aches and and pains). pains). It It improves improves vision, vision, nourishes nourishes body body tissues, tissues, prolongs prolongs age, age, induces induces good good sleep sleep and and improves improves skin skin tone tone and and complexion. complexion. Massage Massage should should be be specially specially done done on on ears, ears, head head and and legs. legs. Massage Massage should should be be avoided avoided when when there there is is increase increase of of Kapha Kapha in in the the body, body, soon soon after after Shodhana Shodhana (Panchakarma (Panchakarma procedure) procedure) and and during during indigestion. indigestion. Page Page No. No. 17 17 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 10. exercise 10. Vyayama Vyayama – — exercise लाघवं praaAed कमसाम य द तोऽि न: मे दस: as:य: ।| Taseadesnacd वभ तघनगा वं CATA यायामात SISTA ् उपजायते ॥I med ateatsiet: AGA: वात प तामयो Tel बालो gGatssieit व ृ ोऽजीण च यजेत ् ।| Heereca अधश या fevered नषे य तsore: ि न धभोिज भ: TAICAAM gatतं eet ु ब ल भ: Rarsersitrartsy: ॥| शीतकाले वस ते च, म दमेव ad ततो Hou अ यथा | | ctतं HeaswqyE कृ वाऽअनुसुखं es दे हं Adda मदयेत ् च सम तत: ॥Il tae aed J, Acad aT AAedd: lāghavaṃ laghavam karmasāmarthyaṃ karmasamarthyam dīpto’gni: dipto’gni: medasa: medasa: kṣaya: ksaya: || vibhaktaghanagātratvaṃ vibhaktaghanagatratvam vyāyāmāt vyayamat upajāyate upajayate ||| vātapittāmayo vatapittamayo bālo balo vṛddho’jīrṇī vrddho’jirni ca ca taṃ tam tyajet tyajet || ardhaśaktyā ardhasaktya niṣevyastu nisevyastu balibhi: balibhi: snigdhabhojibhi: snigdhabhojibhi: ||| śītakāle sttakale vasante vasante ca, ca, mandameva mandameva tato tato anyathā anyatha || taṃ tam kṛtvā’anusukhaṃ krtva’anusukham dehaṃ deham mardayet mardayet ca ca samantata: samantata: ||| Exercise Exercise brings brings about about lightness, lightness, it it improves improves work work capacity, capacity, increases increases digestion digestion power, power, burns burns fat. fat. It It brings brings body body into into good good shape. shape. People People with with diseases diseases originating originating from from Vata Vata and and Pitta, Pitta, children, children, elders, elders, people people with with indigestion indigestion problem problem should should not not do do exercise. exercise. Exercise Exercise should should be be done done till till one’s one’s half half strength. strength. Exercise Exercise should should be be done done compulsorily compulsorily by by those those having having full full strength strength and and who who take take oily oily food food stuff, stuff, From From December December to to May. May. At At the the end end of of the the exercise, exercise, one one should should undergo undergo mild mild massage massage (pressing (pressing the the body body parts parts with with mild mild to to moderate moderate pressure.) pressure.) 11-14 11-14 Adverse Adverse effects effects of of over-exercise: over-exercise: GOON त यः Tae तमको Teac र त प तं TA: मः FA: लमः ृ णा ata: अ त यवायामतः Hal कासो savaeed वर छ द च aaa जायते sactaaad: Excessive Excessive thirst, thirst, emaciation, emaciation, severe severe dyspnoea dyspnoea (difficulty (difficulty in in breathing), breathing), bleeding bleeding disorders, disorders, exhaustion, exhaustion, feeling feeling of of debility debility (even (even without without any any work), work), cough, cough, fever fever and and vomiting vomiting are are caused caused by by excess excess of of exercise. exercise. यायामजागरा व ीहा CAATASTENTCASA SISAयभा या द साहसम ASA ् गजं संहं इवाकषन ना त वन य त aa TAS sates] ् भज Aateranfataaeata Those Those who who indulge indulge in in too too much much of of exercise exercise daily, daily, who who keep keep themselves themselves awake awake till till late late nights, nights, regularly, regularly, who who walk walk long long distances distances regularly, regularly, who who indulge indulge in in excessive excessive sexual sexual activities, activities, too too much just as much of of laughing, laughing, speaking, speaking, and and such such other other strenuous strenuous activities, activities, will will perish, perish, just as aa lion lion perishes perishes after after vanquishing vanquishing an an elephant. elephant. 15. –(powder –— massage) 15. Udvartana Udvartana —(powder massage) उ वतनं Het कफहरं Aad: मेदस: Widesay वलायनम ् ।| िKeka थर करणं Hse अ गानां cap वक् WHat सादकरं WA परम Il ्॥ 3eddat udvartanaṃ udvartanam kaphaharaṃ kaphaharam medasa: medasa: pravilāyanam pravilayanam || sthirīkaraṇaṃ sthirikaranam aṅgānāṃ anganam tvak tvak prasādakaraṃ prasadakaram param param ||| Udvartana Udvartana is is using using powder powder for for massage. massage. It It helps helps to to calm calm down down aggravated aggravated Kapha, Kapha, helps helps to to burn burn fat. fat. Hence Hence it it is is one one of of the the therapies therapies that that many many Ayurvedic Ayurvedic centers centers offer offer for for anti-obesity anti-obesity treatment. treatment. Udvartana Udvartana also also brings brings in in stability stability to to body body organs, organs, improves improves strength strength and and skin skin complexion. complexion. Page Page No. No. 18 18 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 16-18 16-18 – — Snana Snana —– Bathing Bathing द पनं GIARS व ृ यमायु यं Caled नानं Soll ऊजा TAMA बल दम ् ।| HVS क डु At मल HAम Tde वेद Aesl त ा Je त ृ ale दाह WA पा मिजत ् Il॥ at dīpanaṃ dipanam vṛṣyamāyuṣyaṃ vrsyamayusyam snānaṃ snanam ūrjā tirja balapradam balapradam | kaṇḍu kandu mala mala śrama Srama sveda sveda tandrā tandra tṛṭ trt dāha daha pāpmajit papmajit ||| Bathing Bathing improves improves digestion, digestion, acts acts as as aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, prolongs prolongs life, life, increases increases enthusiasm enthusiasm and and strength. strength. It It helps helps to to get get rid rid of of dirt, dirt, waste waste products, products, sweat, sweat, tiredness, tiredness, excessive excessive thirst, thirst, burning burning sensation sensation and and microbes. microbes. SUONF TARGA उ णा GA बन अधकाय य प रषेको Teas: बलावहः ु ा HTATAEA तेनैव GeaATSAIET त ू तमा ग य FolecheaayIT बल केशच ुषाम ् Aetd Pouring Pouring warm warm water water over over the the body body bestows bestows strength, strength, but but the the same same over over the the head, head, makes makes for for loss loss of of strength strength of of the the hair hair and and eyes. eyes. नानम CATT दतने ा य PONTING कणरोगा तसा रषु CAAA आ मानपीनसाजीणभsdaegq गा हतम ् Hearse ु तव सु Tच Mea Bath Bath is is contracontra- indicated indicated for for those those suffering suffering from from facial facial paralysis, paralysis, diseases diseases of of the the eyes, eyes, mouth mouth and and ears, just taken ears, diarrhoea, diarrhoea, flatulence, flatulence, rhinitis, rhinitis, indigestion indigestion and and who who have have just taken food. food. 19. 19. Sad Sad Vritta Vritta – — Good/healthy Good/healthy conduct: conduct: जीण fect हतं Tact मतं aaa चा यात ् atन वे गानीरयेत ् sere बलात ् ।| न वे गतो HeaHes: अ यकाय: Lad यात ् न अिज वा TeA सा यं ofet dena A Ae a Hfsica आमयम jīrṇe hitaṃ 3TASAL ् ॥|I jirne hitam mitaṃ mitam cādyāt cadyat na na vegānīrayet veganirayet balāt balat | na na vegito vegito anyakārya: anyakarya: syāt syat na na ajitvā ajitva sādhyaṃ sadhyam āmayam amayam ||| Jeerne Jeerne hitam hitam mitam mitam chaadyat chaadyat – — One One should should always always eat, eat, only only after after digestion digestion of of previous previous food, food, in in limited limited quantity. quantity. Na Na vegan vegan neerayet neerayet —– one one should should not not induce induce natural natural urges urges forcefully. forcefully. Example: Example: urinating, urinating, when when there there is is no no urge urge to to pass pass urine. urine. Na Na Vegito Vegito anya anya kaaryaha kaaryaha – — one one should should immediately immediately attend attend to to natural natural urges, urges, whenever whenever they they come, come, without without being being busy busy in in other other activities. activities. One One should should undergo undergo treatment treatment to to diseases diseases as as soon soon as as possible. possible. 20-21 20-21 Words Words of of wisdom: wisdom: Path Path of of righteousness: righteousness: स मता: सवा: व ृ तय: ।| स वना GA धमात ् ACA त मात ् TART धमपरोadc भवे त ्Il॥ Geren: Waste At: Wieds: TEुखं च a न a fae ुखाथा: सवभ ूतानां Act: sukhārthā: sukhartha: sarvabhūtānāṃ sarvabhttanam matā: mata: sarvā: sarva: pravṛttaya: pravrttaya: || sukhaṃ sukham ca ca na na vinā vina dharmāt dharmat tasmāt tasmat dharmaparo dharmaparo bhavet bhavet ||| All All the the creatures creatures are are behind behind happiness. happiness. There There is is no no happiness, happiness, without without righteousness. righteousness. Hence Hence all all should should follow follow the the path path of of righteousness. righteousness. Page Page No. No. 19 19 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan HFA भ या HEU, क याण म ा ण AAcaaara: सेवे तेतरदरू गः Friends Friends should should be be served served with with affection affection and and good good deeds, deeds, whereas whereas the the others others (wicked) (wicked) should should be be kept kept at at aa distance. distance. 22. 22. 10 10 types types of of bad bad deeds deeds हंसा Fas तेय sea अ यथा art कामं पै शु यं sey प ष sea अनत सि भ न sees आलाप care यापाद sisqer अ भ या cHक् farceeay वपययम ् fear Sees ृ े ।| UiFaest ॥Wot पापं wafea कम त दशधा काया as वा मनसै यजेत|् । aren are Aad: : Sete hiṃsā himsa steya steya anyathā anyatha kāmaṃ kamam paiśunyaṃ paisunyam paruṣa parusa anṛte anrte | sambhinna sambhinna ālāpa alapa vyāpāda vyapada abhidyā abhidya dṛk drk viparyayam viparyayam ||| pāpaṃ papam karmeti karmeti daśadhā dasadha kāyā kaya vāṅ van manasai: manasai: tyajet tyajet | | These These ten ten sins sins pertaining pertaining to to the the body, body, speech speech and and mind mind should should be be avoided. avoided. Himsa Himsa (causing (causing injury, injury, torture torture etc.) etc.) steya steya (( stealing, stealing, robbing), robbing), anyathakama anyathakama (unlawful (unlawful sexual sexual activity, activity, desiring desiring for for others), others), paisunya paisunya (abusive (abusive or or harsh harsh speech speech ), ), parusha parusha vachana vachana (harsh (harsh speech) speech) Anruta Anruta vacana vacana (( speaking speaking untruth), untruth), sambhinna sambhinna alapa alapa (speech (speech causing causing separation, separation, breaking breaking of of company), company), vyapada vyapada (quarrel, (quarrel, intention intention of of harming harming ), ), abhidya abhidya (jealousy, (jealousy, not not tolerating tolerating good good of of others) others) and and drgviparyaya drgviparyaya (( finding finding fault, fault, misunderstanding, misunderstanding, faithlessness faithlessness etc. etc. with with scriptures, scriptures, elders elders etc) etc) Of Of these these ten, ten, the the first first three three are are related related to to body, body, next next fourfour- related related to to speech speech and and last last three three —– related related with with mind. mind. 22-47 िृ त या धशोकाताननुवतत शि ततः 22-47 अव Hefecdeafereierdatetada era: Those Those who who have have no no means means of of livelihood, livelihood, who who are are suffering suffering from from diseases diseases and and who who are are afflicted afflicted with with grief grief should should be be helped. helped. आ मव सततं प येद प Are क ट Atifernay पपी लकम srdaeaMangqa वै यनप ा तथीन ् Mead WA ् अचये ेवगो व व ृ deep ृ aiaeter Even Even the the insects insects and and ants ants should should be be seen seen with with respect, respect, similar similar to to aa physician, physician, king king and and guests. guests. वम पे त ् it ुखा ना थनः क F ु या नावम येत ना aert faqarata: palette Beggars Beggars should should not not be be disappointed, disappointed, abused abused or or objected. objected. उपकार धानः FAATARA यादपकारपरे sent अ यरौ स प वप वे कमना,हे तावी य फले न STARAMA: weaelarcedHaa gardreaowe A त Iु One One should should be be very very helpful helpful even even to to his his foes, foes, even even though though they they are are not not helpful. helpful. Sampat Sampat Vipatsu Vipatsu Eka Eka manaaha: manaaha: One One should should maintain maintain aa balanced balanced mind mind both both during during calamity calamity and and prosperity. prosperity. One One should should not not be be envious envious towards towards wealth wealth and and happiness happiness of of others. others. Page Page No. No. 20 20 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan कालेfect हतं fat मतं sarafaearie शलम ् ूया वसंवा द पेYercrey are Kale Kale bruyat bruyat —– speak speak only only on on the the right right occasion. occasion. Hitam Hitam bruyat bruyat —– speak speak good good words, words, be be pleasant. pleasant. Mitam Mitam bruyat bruyat —– speak speak little, little, as as per per necessity. necessity. Do Do not not argue, argue, do do not not say say untrue untrue things. things. प व णामद qarsenst, a: aller: Heong: ू ा भभाषी, स ुमुखः स ुशीलः क ृ ःु नै कः Ge, सुखी, न सव ach: sas व धो न कतः fasiseit af श ersfend: न चदा मन श मानं क य च पुम ् a कि aPadacaa wd ुं ना acest HEIASTA TaReaeatatea Ft चao fa:teteat काशये नापमानं न नः नेहतां Wa: भोः Purva be the Purva abhibhashi abhibhashi __be the first first to to greet, greet, to to start start conversation conversation sumukhaha sumukhaha —– have have aa smiling smiling face face susheelaha susheelaha – — have have good good character character karuna, karuna, mrudu: mrudu: —– be be courteous, courteous, be be soft soft in in speech speech and and activity. activity. Na Na Eka Eka sukhee sukhee —– Do Do not not be be aa person person who who likes likes to to be be alone alone always. always. Na Na sarvata: sarvata: vishrabdo vishrabdo – — do do not not believe believe everything everything around around you you Na Na shankhitaha shankhitaha —– do do not not suspect suspect everything everything around around Do Do not not instantly instantly think think someone someone as as your your foe foe or or that that he he is is aa foe foe of of someone someone else. else. Do Do not not publicly publicly talk talk about about insults insults that that you you underwent, underwent, Do Do not not publicly publicly talk talk about about disaffection disaffection towards towards your your king king (boss/ (boss/ master master // senior, senior, in in today’s today’s context) context) जन याशयमाल य यो रतु य त THIRST A यथा BAT प aaa तं वानुवतत पराराधनपि डतः a तथै adaeada wRrecaitsa: Keeping Keeping in in mind mind the the nature nature of of he he people, people, one one should should deal deal with with them them in in such such manner manner as as bet bet pleasing pleasing to to them, them, becoming becoming well-versed well-versed in in the the art art of of adoring adoring others. others. न दि या ण न ता य तलालयेत ् a पीडये tsafeteant a चै daratdenead The The sense sense organs organs should should neither neither be be strainedvery strainedvery much much nor nor should should they they be be fondled fondled or or very very much. much. वगशू यं नार भं भजे तं चा वरोधयन ् Do Do not not engage engage yourself yourself in in things things that that are are devoid devoid of of three three pursuits pursuits (dharma (dharma (righteousness), (righteousness), arha, arha, (wealth) (wealth) and and kama kama (pleasure) (pleasure) ): ): should should carry carry on on the the occupation occupation without without going going contrary contrary to to them them (dharma (dharma and and karma). karma). अन य म यमाम ् see TAA ु ALTA ु ाया तपदं सवधमष In In all all dealings dealings (activities) (activities) one one should should adopt adopt the the middle middle mean mean only, only, avoid avoid extremes. extremes. Page Page No. No. 21 21 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Personal Personal hygiene: hygiene: ARTATS AA AAS TAT: नीचरोमनख म ु olनमला मलायनः नानशीलः: स स व अनsefesiss वलः Tereteet: TE: FAM soda: ु रु भः स ु ेषो HeaeM ु बणो One One should should cut cut his his hair, hair, nails, nails, and and moustaches moustaches regularly. regularly. Keep Keep feet, feet, ears, ears, nose, nose, eyes, eyes, urethra urethra and and anus anus clean clean Take Take bath bath daily, daily, put put on on scents scents and and good good dress dress which which is is not not superfluous superfluous but but is is pleasant pleasant to to look look at. at. धारये सततं waifagarsaelveh: र न स म महौषधीः macddd सातप पदATO ाणो FATA वचरे युगमा AATAT क् न श areata चा य यके art काय aust द डी ate मौल aeratel सहायवान ् fafa Wear Wear precious precious stones, stones, potent potent hymns hymns and and herbs herbs (kept (kept inside inside amulets) amulets) on on the the body. body. Walk Walk holding holding an an umbrella, umbrella, putting putting on on foot foot wear wear and and looking looking straight straight to to aa distance distance of of four four arms arms length length in in front front of of you. you. In In case case of of urgent urgent work work at at nights, nights, one one should should go go equipped equipped with with aa baton, baton, headhead- dress dress and and an an assistant. assistant. चै यपूज वजाश त छायाभ मत ीन ् TATACT ARE ACMA TTषु ाशुचeT ना ामे छकरालो टब लCAAA नानभुवो न APACSRTASCAH TTच One One should should not not invade invade on on the the shade shade of of aa holy holy tree tree on on which which deities deities reside reside (or (or aa Buddhist Buddhist shrine), shrine), materials materials (or (or men) men) of of worship, worship, banner banner and and unholy unholy thing, thing, heap heap of of ash, ash, husk husk and and dirt, dirt, sand sand dunes, dunes, boulders, boulders, places places of of bali bali (offering (offering sacrifices sacrifices to to Gods, Gods, demons demons etc.) etc.) and and bathing. bathing. नद ं तरे नाि न क धम भ जेत ् aa Reaन बाह TEI, ु यां, aiseHrraaad सि द धनावंgai वृ ं च नारोहे दद ु टयानवत ् afaruand a anteegreurrad One One should should not not swim swim across across rivers rivers with with arms, arms, should should not not walk walk facing facing huge huge fire, fire, should should not not travel travel in in aa risky risky boat, boat, not not climb climb aa tree tree doubtful doubtful of of strength; strength; or or ride ride on on aa vehicle, vehicle, which which is is in in bad bad condition. condition. नासंवecत ु या o iS ु तहा य व ° ु भणम~ ् ृ म8 ुखः; क S One One should should not not sneeze, sneeze, laugh laugh or or yawn yawn without without covering covering his his mouth. mouth. ना सकां afन faprotaecnaralatareraqay वकु णीया नाक मा व लखे व aTeat ु म् ना गै चे टे त Tear, वगण नासीतो कटकि चरम ् ु ं, aelcacneHieatAa, aTsseased One One should should not not blow blow his his nose nose (except (except for for forcing forcing out out the the dirty dirty excretion); excretion); not not scratch scratch the the ground ground without without any any reason, reason, not not do do ugly ugly movements movements of of the the parts parts of of the the body body and and sit sit on on ones ones own own heels heels for for aa long long time. time. Page Page No. No. 22 22 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan दे हवा चे तसां चे टाः ाक् मा व नवतये त ् नो वजानुि चरं त ठे त ् One One should should stop stop the the activities activities of of the the body, body, of of speech speech and and of of the the mind mind before before getting getting exhausted; exhausted; should should not not keep keep his his knees knees above above for for long long period period (keeping (keeping erect erect folded folded at at the the knee knee while while sleeping sleeping or or standing standing on on the the hands hands keeping keeping the the legs legs up up etc. etc. )) न सेवेत न व aédतं Add a ada ू म् तथा Dea च वरचै Arca या त चत AM aT TTA AAT ् ु पथसुरालयान स दवा अ Geredyeagyeererenter 31hप नa ुनाटवीशू यगहृ मशाना न fear One One should should not not reside reside at at night night on on trees, trees, meeting meeting place place of of three three roads, roads, or or places places where where people people assemble assemble for for recreation, recreation, vicinity vicinity of of aa holy holy tree tree (or (or aa Buddhist Buddhist shrine), shrine), meeting meeting place place of of four four roads roads and and temple, temple, (house (house of of god). god). One One should should not not reside reside even even during during daytime, daytime, in in aa place place of of slaughter, slaughter, aa forest, forest, haunted haunted house house and and burial burial ground. ground. सवथे ेत aed, ना द यं, न शरसा ata वहे त ् added a भारं at Pea ने ततं YEA सू मं AragAeayaiey द तामे या या ण च aadेत Tad 7 No No one one should should gaze gaze at at the the sun sun for for aa long long time, time, should should not not carry carry heavy heavy weight weight on on his his head, head, not not see see continuously continuously objects objects which which are are minute, minute, shining, shining, dirty dirty and and unpleasant. unpleasant. म य व यस Meaelaeleel धानदानादाना न नाचरे Atami AILत ् One One should should not not engage engage in in selling, selling, brewing, brewing, free free distributing, distributing, or or receiving receiving of of wine wine .. पुरोवातातपपरज तष नलानN ् GAT AT ATA ASTIN TR षाeA ु ारप ‘> अनज ृ ःु वथु गारकास व ना नमैथ> न ु म< ् RASA FIEIAse क प यालदंie ि faarOret: वपा णनः ू लछायां न ृ व टं cArora ह नानाया त नपुणसेवां Feraeaecat: व मु तमैः Srreraiatergorar स tUeds या व UE यवहार ना ययन च eA तनम ् Ae NEA ीeAव Maa श गणाक OTA णग OTTO णकाप UTED णकाशनम TAAस TTA ् ु ASTUTT गा व AGA नखैवा यं SEA ह तकेशावध MAH MALTA, ूननम ् तोयाि नपू यम येन यानं यम ् AartareaAeaet Bet ध YHूमं शवा wars म या तसि तं asrraddecd व भ वात ये TYीषु च यजेत ् Aeaicaied I old The The person person should should avoid avoid the the direct direct breeze, breeze, sunlight, sunlight, dust, dust, snow(dew), snow(dew), hard hard breeze breeze (whirlwind (whirlwind etc); etc); should should not not sneeze sneeze belch, belch, cough, cough, sleep, sleep, dine dine or or copulate copulate in in improper improper postures, postures, should should avoid avoid the the shade shade of of aa scaffold, scaffold, places places hated hated by by the the king king (or (or government), government), company company of of wild wild animals, animals, biting biting animals animals and and those those with with horns; horns; of of mean, mean, wicked wicked (uncivilised (uncivilised and and very very intelligent intelligent persons); persons); avoid avoid quarrel quarrel with with good good men; men; avoid avoid taking taking foods, foods, sex, sex, sleeping, sleeping, study study and and recapitulation recapitulation at at the the time time of of meeting meeting of of the the night night and and Page Page No. No. 23 23 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan sunrise, sunrise, Avoid Avoid the the food food given given by by enemies, enemies, given given during during sacrificial sacrificial ceremony, ceremony, (that (that offered offered by by large large group group of of donors donors of of different different castes), castes), that that given given by by prostitutes prostitutes and and merchants; merchants; one one should should not not make make sound sound with with the the body body parts, parts, mouth mouth and and nails, nails, nor nor shake shake the the hand hand and and hairs; hairs; should should not not move move in in between between two two (receptacles (receptacles of of )) water, water, fire fire and and the the worshipful; worshipful; should should avoid avoid the the smoke smoke of of aa cadaver; cadaver; too too much much indulgence, indulgence, in in wine wine (drinking), (drinking), believing believing and and independence independence for for (wicked) (wicked) women. women. आचायः AaAery सवचे टासु oil लोक va एव feह ef: धीमतः Hay: अनुकुया तमेवातो caters लौ ककेअथ ware: पर कः HeHPAtccAara For For an an intelligent intelligent person person the the world world is is aa teacher, teacher, hence hence one one should should imitate imitate the the world world after after carefully carefully considering considering their their meaning meaning and and effects effects of of such such actions. actions. WeteaaA PATI SA: आ स तानता AT: यागः कायवा चेतसां दमः वाथबु ः पराथष पया त म त स तम ् rate: wey ु sacdiafa sega Compassion Compassion with with all all living living beings, beings, granting granting of of gifts, gifts, controlling controlling the the activities activities of of the the body, body, speech speech and and mind; mind; feeling feeling of of selfishness selfishness in in the the interests interests of of others others (looking (looking after after the the interest interest of of others others as as his his own) own) these these are are sufficient sufficient rules rules of of good good conduct. conduct. न तं दना न मे याि त कथ भूत य qua स त Ardea A Uied Hayraaea द ःु खभा न Had भव येवं न सि न हत म ृ तः Gwasat cstयं aeaeaeagia: He, He, who who constantly constantly thinks thinks of of how how his his day day and and night night are are passing passing and and adopts adopts the the right right way, way, will will never never become become a a victim victim of of sorrow. sorrow. SQN: TA,न , यं F Weal PAARL ् इ याचारः समासे ा नो त समाचरन आय वतान ् FRANGAALaS Bel लोकां oilenieaच शा eMeacrey ुरारो यमै वय यशो Thus Thus was was enumerated, enumerated, in in brief brief the the rules rules of of good good conduct; conduct; he he who who adopts adopts it it will will (surely) (surely) attain attain long long life, life, health, health, wealth, wealth, reputation reputation and and also also the the eternal eternal world. world. Thus Thus ends ends the the chapter chapter called called Dinacarya, Dinacarya, the the second second in in sutrasthana sutrasthana of of Astanga Astanga hrudaya hrudaya composed composed by by Srimad Srimad Vaghata, Vaghata, son son of of Sri Sri Vaidyapati Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Simhagupta. Page Page No. No. 24 24 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter ऋतुचया Seasonal Chapter 3: 3: Ritucharya Ritucharya adhyaya adhyaya RTT Seasonal Regimen Regimen Ritucharya Ritucharya – — Ayurvedic Ayurvedic Seasonal Seasonal Regimen Regimen Ritucharya Ritucharya is is the the 3rd 3rd chapter chapter of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hrudayam. Hrudayam. The The word word Ritucharya Ritucharya is is made made of of two two words words –— Ritu Ritu means means seasons seasons Charya Charya means means do’s do’s and and don’ts don’ts (regimen). (regimen). This This important important chapter chapter discusses discusses in in detail detail regarding regarding different different seasons seasons and and the the regimen regimen to to be be followed. followed. Six Six Seasons Seasons —– in in the the Ancient Ancient Ayurvedic Ayurvedic Calendar Calendar -- Aaa: मासै वसं यैमाघा यैः HAT मात Ve ऋतवः ् ष Recta: TAT: मत ृ ाः श शरो ser अथ daeava वस त च aieat ी मो asenaiear: वषशर हमाः RY श शरा याि भ तै तु वeae यादयनम ANcaieaiecded aaa ु तरम ् आदानं U, च, aeleect तदाद ते FUT नण त दनं Toy बलम ् Mela ृ ां Wide A A season season (Ritu) (Ritu) is is comprised comprised of of two two months months (two (two Masa). Masa). Shishira Shishira Ritu Ritu (winter, (winter, dewy dewy season) season) – — Magha Magha and and Phalguna Phalguna (Mid (Mid January January – — Mid Mid March) March) Vasanta Vasanta Ritu Ritu (Spring (Spring season) season) – — Chaitra Chaitra and and Vaishakha Vaishakha (Mid (Mid March March – — Mid Mid May) May) Greeshma Greeshma Ritu Ritu (Summer (Summer season) season) – — Jyeshta Jyeshta and and Ashadha Ashadha (Mid (Mid May May to to Mid Mid July) July) The The above above three three Ritus Ritus form form Uttarayana Uttarayana —– Northern Northern solstice. solstice. Here, Here, fire fire is is dominant. dominant. It It is is also also called called as as Adana Adana Kala, Kala, wherein wherein the the human human strength strength is is relatively relatively low. low. Varsha Varsha Ritu Ritu (Rainy (Rainy Season) Season) – — Shravana Shravana and and Bhadrapada Bhadrapada – — Mid Mid July July —– mid mid September September Sharath Sharath Ritu Ritu (Autumn (Autumn season) season) – — Ashvayuja Ashvayuja and and Karthika Karthika —– Mid Mid September September to to Mid Mid November November Hemantha Hemantha Ritu Ritu (Winter (Winter season) season) – — Margashira Margashira and and Pushya Pushya -- Mid Mid November November to to Mid Mid January January These These three three seasons seasons form form Dakshinayana Dakshinayana —– Southern Southern solstice. solstice. It It is is also also called called as as Visarga Visarga Kala, Kala, wherein wherein the the human human strength strength will will be be relatively relatively high. high. Uttarayana Uttarayana —– Adana Adana kala kala – — Northern Northern Solstice Solstice —– mid mid January January —– mid mid July July ति म य यथती SUSAN णो ण ा ATeTea माग वभावतः ASASEAAAA STAT: आ द यपवनाः Beal सौ यान ् araied पयि त yoNet गण ् भुवः sieerdet: ु ान aa: त तः HWA: कषायः HEH? कटुको Sfoleil ब लनो अ रसा HAIL मात ् fara: HT TA त मादादानमा PATE TeTT ATS नेयम ् Because Because of of the the nature nature of of the the path, path, both both the the Sun Sun and and wind wind become become very very strong, strong, powerful powerful and and dry dry during during this this half half of of the the year. year. It It takes takes away away all all the the cooling cooling qualities qualities of of the the earth. earth. Bitter, Bitter, Astringent Astringent and and Pungent Pungent tastes tastes (Tikta, (Tikta, kashaya kashaya and and Katu Katu Rasas) Rasas) will will be be more more powerful, powerful, respectively, respectively, in in the the successive successive Ritus. Ritus. Hence Hence Adana Adana Kala Kala is is dominated dominated by by fire. fire. Page Page No. No. 25 25 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Dakshinayana Dakshinayana —– Visarga Visarga Kala Kala —– Southern Southern Solstice Solstice —– mid mid July July – — mid mid January January ऋतवो द णायनम ् RA STROH, वषादयो fausea वसग च Jase य बलं Taqorcsay वसज asiedt ृ ा ययम ् सौ य वाद BAY सोमोfeह seratel बलवान ् हGrad यते Va: र वः aleacated मे घव ृ य नलैः शीतै ततापे Alar मह तले Fagseeaterst: etd: ः शा eeaayy िTEATTLACIEAAIUTARNT न धा चेहा ललवणमधुरा Sete ब लनो TAT: रसाः During During this this period, period, the the Sun Sun releases releases strength strength of of the the people. people. Here Here moon moon is is more more powerful, powerful, earth earth is is cooled cooled down down due due to to clouds, clouds, rain rain and and cold cold wind. wind. Sour, Sour, Salt Salt and and sweet sweet (Amla, (Amla, Lavana Lavana and and Madhura) Madhura) tastes tastes are are dominant dominant respectively respectively during during the the three three seasons seasons of of this this period. period. Variation Variation in in strength strength as as per per season season -शीते अ यं, वGia िृ त घम बलं , म षयो: ।| ed see, TA अ Hedपं Sol, AeAयं तFT ु शेyar: śīte Site agryaṃ, agryam, vṛṣti vrsti gharme gharme alpaṃ alpam balaṃ, balam, madhyaṃ madhyam tu tu śeṣayo: Sesayo: | | Winter Winter – — Hemantha Hemantha and and Shishira Shishira —– mid mid November November – — mid mid March March —– Highest Highest strength strength Summer Summer and and rainy rainy seasons seasons – — mid mid May May —– mid mid September September – — Lowest Lowest strength strength Spring Spring and and Autumn Autumn – — Medium Medium strength. strength. 1. 1. Hemanta Hemanta Ritucharya Ritucharya – — Ayurveda Ayurveda Winter Winter regimen: regimen: Mid Mid November November —– Mid Mid January January ब लनः शीतसं रोधा ेम ते Wael बलो Heer: अनलः Set: eaeNagAeA AAU aca: भव य पे धनो Mel धातन स पचे वायुने रतः ू ्F अतो fet हमे ataeeda अि म सेवेत Falqaraaraonsaey वा व ललवणा सान ् Hot During During Hemantha, Hemantha, the the people people are are strong, strong, digestive digestive fire fire becomes becomes powerful, powerful, because because it it gets gets obstructed obstructed from from flowing flowing outward outward due due to to external external winter. winter. Like Like fuel fuel consumes consumes the the things things that that it it comes comes into into contact, contact, digestive digestive fire fire may may cause cause emaciation emaciation of of body body tissues. tissues. Hence, Hence, in in this this period, period, one one should should consume consume food food predominant predominant with with sweet sweet sour sour and and salt salt tastes. tastes. दै या नशानामे त ह Wats ातरे व ब eaters gerferat ुभु तः; अव यकाय स भा य यथो saad rarer Beateतं शीलये freeदनु वात नतैलैर य गं म वमदनम ् ूि न तै adetdeasat Aled dotलं fara नयु ं क frag Hert: Get पादाघातं wera च aT य yieaa: ु शलैः साध ुि ततः As As the the nights nights are are longer, longer, person person feels feels hungry hungry early early in in the the morning. morning. So, So, after after attending attending to to oblutions, oblutions, one one should should resort resort to to Abhaynga Abhaynga (oil (oil massage) massage) with with oils oils that that have have Vata Vata balancing balancing properties. properties. Massage Massage should should be be done done especially especially to to scalp scalp and and forehead. forehead. Mild Mild massaging, massaging, wrestling wrestling till till one’s one’s half half strength strength and and trampling trampling of of the the body body is is recommended. recommended. Page Page No. No. 26 26 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan कषायपgdeaetdad: त नेह ततः Fara नातो यथा वध Ha Bararer कु कुमेन सदपण द धो अगु धू पतः रसान ् ि न धं पलं पु टं गौडम छसुरां सुराम ् ूम प टमाषे ु ीरो थ वकृतीः श meगोध RascrrapetcataaA: eA:ुभाः नवम लं , शौचकाय सख adaedनं वसां aa तै dof, that qalanr ु ोदकम ् ावरािजनकौशेय वेणीकौचवा ea तत Wanisternlaraniplaa ृ म् उ ण वभावैलघA: ावत SUCAMAAT Met भजे satelत ् ु भः WA: ृ ः शयनं य करणान ् FAG वे दं Wea पाद ाणं च GF Hebe FT सवदा Aday ु या अक After After this, this, oil oil is is washed washed off off with with astringent astringent powders powders and and bathing. bathing. Then Then fine fine powder powder of of Saffron Saffron and and kasthuri kasthuri (musk) (musk) is is applied. applied. The The body body is is exposed exposed to to the the fumes fumes of of aguru aguru (Aquilaria (Aquilaria agallocha) agallocha) Since Since the the digestion digestion power power is is high, high, heavy-to-digest heavy-to-digest food food such such as as meat meat soup soup mixed mixed with with fats, fats, meat meat of jaggery, supernatant of well well nourished nourished animals, animals, wine wine prepared prepared with with jaggery, supernatant part part of of wine wine (Sura) (Sura) should should be be had had more. more. Food Food prepared prepared with with wheat wheat flour, flour, black black gram gram products products of of sugarcane sugarcane and and of of milk, milk, food food prepared prepared from from freshly freshly harvested harvested corn, corn, muscles, muscles, fat fat and and edible edible oils oils should should be be partaken partaken as as food. food. Warm Warm water water should should be be used used for for oblutions, oblutions, thick thick sheet sheet made made of of cotton, cotton, leather, leather, silk, silk, wool wool or or bark bark of of trees trees that that are are light light in in weight weight should should be be used used during during sleep. sleep. Exposure Exposure to to sunlight sunlight and and fire fire should should be judiciously. Foot be resorted resorted to, to, judiciously. Foot wear wear should should be be worn worn always. always. GaRReAAMOG: BAeT: पीवरो तान ो यः समदाः TAet: मदाः Tar: याः हरि प Riedत शीतम faqs yopspratact: ु णा यो ध ू कु कुमयौवनैः Women Women who who have have -- well well developed developed thighs, thighs, breasts, breasts, buttocks, buttocks, who who are are enchanting, enchanting, and and exhilarated exhilarated by by the the use use of of -- fragrant fragrant fumes, fumes, scents, scents, yuthfulness, yuthfulness, and and thus thus made made warm warm in in their their body, body, who who are are liked, liked, drive drive away away the the cold cold by by their their embrace. embrace. One One may may have have sex sex as as per per his his liking. liking. HSA TATA STAूवेLATTA: अ गारतापस त तगभभ मचा रणः शीतपा यज नतो न दोषो Hawes 7 at जात a ु जायते sad Persons Persons who who spend spend their their time time residing residing in in houses houses kept kept warm warm by by fire, fire, in in inner inner most most apartment apartment encircled encircled with with others, others, or or in in underground underground chambers, chambers, will will not not be be affected affected by by diseases diseases due due to to cold cold and and dryness. dryness. Overall, Overall, in in Hemantha Hemantha Ritu, Ritu, the the strength strength and and digestion digestion power power are are more. more. Hence Hence one one can can exercise, exercise, undergo undergo oil oil massage, massage, eat eat heavy heavy foods foods and and may may have have sex. sex. 2. 2. Sisira Sisira Rutu Rutu charya charya —– Ayurveda Ayurveda winter winter regimen regimen – — Mid Mid January January – — Mid Mid March: March: अयमे व ध: काय: शरे ऽ प faetsa: वशेषत: ।| dar तदा feह शीतम धकं Wet रौ यं चादानकालजम aramaव fate: wre: िPeNsh eftaaier arate ् ॥I ayameva ayameva vidhi: vidhi: kārya: karya: śśire’pi SSire’pi viśeṣata: visesata: || tadā tada hi hi śītamadhikaṃ Sitamadhikam raukṣyaṃ rauksyam cādānakālajam cadanakalajam ||| Even Even in in shishira shishira Ritu, Ritu, the the same same regimen, regimen, as as described described above above should should be be adopted adopted with with more more intensity. intensity. During During this this period period cold cold is is severe severe and and dryness dryness more. more. Page Page No. No. 27 27 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 3. 3. Vasanta Vasanta Rutucharya Rutucharya (Ayurveda (Ayurveda Spring Spring regimen) regimen) – — Mid Mid March March – — Mid Mid May May anita Hepes: कफि चतो feह RMR श शरे sec वस ते अकाश ुता पतः ह वा अि नं कु ते रोगानत तं वरया जये त ् ती णैवमनन या यैलघु ै च भोजनै Hetlerteraeteryeaea aitstet: ः AMAA Asta यायामो वतनाघातै िज वा Loले LATOTA माणमु eT बणम ् नातो 3tef अनforce: Fea ु ल तः कपIca. ूरच दनागु कु कुमैः प2 ुरUTA ाणयवगोध aai eras TAOS ूम ौ जा गलश ू यभुक् सहकाररसोि म ाना वा य era यया sitet अ पतान ् Fearteaieasaeaen या यस गसुरभीन ् Macrae यने ो पला कतान ् Parsee reser सौमन यकृ तो eeatedae या य a: यै ः स हतः ara पबे त ् Pieriiepel) fed: fersfarer rarheseeerAred ATTA TeT,N ् नगदानासवा र टसीध3 ुमा Xवीकमाधवान श सारा बु Atarg म व बु Acard जलदा बु Tच (SRT ृ गबे रा बु AKG Kapha Kapha which which has has undergone undergone increase increase in in Shishira Shishira (cold (cold season) season) becomes becomes liquefied liquefied by by the the heat heat of of the the Sun Sun in in Vasanta Vasanta (spring). (spring). It It diminishes diminishes the the digestive digestive fire fire (Agni) (Agni) and and gives gives rise rise to to many many diseases. diseases. Hence Hence Kapha Kapha should should be be controlled controlled quickly, quickly, by by resorting resorting to to strong strong emesis emesis therapy therapy (Vamana (Vamana Panchakarma Panchakarma procedure), procedure), Nasya Nasya (nasal (nasal medication) medication) and and other other therapies. therapies. Food Food should should also also be be chosen chosen to to mitigate mitigate Kapha, Kapha, that that are are easily easily digestible digestible and and dry dry (moisture-free, (moisture-free, fat-free). fat-free). Physical Physical exercises, exercises, dry dry massage massage and and mild mild trampling trampling should should be be done. done. Having Having thus thus mitigated mitigated the the kapha, kapha, the the person person should should take take bath, bath, anoint anoint the the body body with with the the paste paste of of karpura karpura (camphor), (camphor), candana candana (sandalwood), (sandalwood), aguru aguru (Aquilaria (Aquilaria agallocha), agallocha), and and kumkuma kumkuma (saffron). (saffron). Have Have one one year year old old barley, barley, wheat wheat and and honey, honey, meat meat of of animals animals of of desert-like desert-like land, land, and and meat meat roasted roasted in in fire fire as as food; food; Drink juice of Drink the the juice of mango mango fruit fruit mixed mixed with with fragrant fragrant substances, substances, in in the the company company of of friends, friends, getting getting itit served served by by the the beloved; beloved; the the drink, drink, thereby thereby producing producing satisfaction. satisfaction. Beverages Beverages such such as as asava asava (fermented (fermented infusion), infusion), arista arista (fermented (fermented decoction), decoction), sidhu sidhu (fermented (fermented infusion), juice), or infusion), mardvika mardvika (fermented (fermented grape grape juice), or sarambu sarambu (extract (extract of of trees trees such such as as asana, asana, candana candana etc.) jalada (musta etc.) or or water water mixed mixed with with honey, honey, or or water water boiled boiled with with jalada (musta – — Nut Nut grass). grass). 18-22 18-22 द णा नलशीतेषु wat प रतो sterarey जलवा हषु aferniecaeatay अ ु टन टसय ू षु म णकु मकाि तषु परपु ट वघु टे षु कामकमा तभू मषु व च पु पव ृ ेषु काननेषु सुगि धषु गो ठ कथा भ च ा भम यहनं THATS गमये सुखी aTSdrRUseaasaesed The The person person should should spend spend his his midday midday in in the the company company of of friends friends engaged engaged in in pleasant pleasant games, games, pastimes, pastimes, story story telling telling etc., etc., in in forests forests (or (or gardens). gardens). The The gardens gardens should should have have cool cool breeze breeze from from south south direction, direction, with with plenty plenty of of reservoirs reservoirs of of water water all all around, around, invisible invisible or or poor poor sunlight, sunlight, the the Page Page No. No. 28 28 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan land land covered covered with with shining shining crystals, crystals, with with the the cuckoo cuckoo everywhere everywhere making making pleasant pleasant sounds sounds and and engaged engaged in in love-play, love-play, with with trees trees and and different different kinds kinds of of beautiful beautiful and and sweet sweet smelling smelling flowers. flowers. गु शीत दवा व निeast न धाroratnieetstt लमधRAAT frafeareata ुरां येजेत ् FRR Avoid Avoid foods foods that that are are hard hard to-digest to-digest and and cold, cold, sleeping sleeping at at day day time, time, foods foods which which are are fatty, fatty, sour sour and and sweet. sweet. Because, Because, all all these these will will increase increase Kapha. Kapha. 4. 4. Greeshma Greeshma Ritucharya Ritucharya (Ayurveda (Ayurveda Summer Summer Regimen) Regimen) Mid Mid May May – — Mid Mid July: July: ती णांशुर तती णांशु मे aera सं पतीव oa यत ् qevnentadernersica यहं afact ीयते veeat ले मा ते yeas detन वाय araea atic ु च वधते अतो अि म पटुक व ल यायामाकरां यजेत ् In In Greesma Greesma (summer) (summer) the the sun sun rays rays become become powerful powerful and and appear appear to to be be destructive. destructive. Kapha Kapha decreases decreases day day by by day day and and Vata Vata increases increases consequently, consequently, hence hence avoid avoid use use of of salt, salt, pungent pungent and and sour sour foods, foods, heavy heavy physical physical exercises exercises and and exposure exposure to to sunlight, sunlight, during during this this season. season. 26-27 26-27 भजे मधुरसे वा नं लघु ि न धं हमं वम ् स श ल या स तन atadaterasa Ah eT ् ु ीततोय स ता गो Preaertdel ू ् सशकरान Food Food which which are are sweet, sweet, light light (easy (easy to to digest), digest), fatty, fatty, cold cold and and liquid liquid should should be be taken, taken, take take cornflour cornflour mixed mixed with with cold cold water water and and sugar sugar after after taking taking bath bath in in cold cold water. water. Indication Indication for for limited limited use use of of wine wine during during summer: summer: म यं Fन 04, पेय,ं पे व पं , स यथा ait शोफ Mes शै थ य ate दाह Aleley मोहान ् HAA करो त Aq तत ् ॥Il २९ Hea VTयं aTवा Taed, Gaea a ।| अ Hes 2 ुबहुवा र वा madyaṃ madyam na na peyaṃ, peyam, peyaṃ peyam vā va svalpaṃ, svalpam, subahuvāri subahuvari vā va || anyathā anyatha śopha sopha śaithilya Saithilya dāha daha mohān mohan karoti karoti tat tat ||| 29 29 Madya Madya (wine) (wine) should should not not be be taken; taken; if if very very necessary, necessary, taken taken in in very very little little quantity quantity or or diluted diluted with with more more quantity quantity of of water; water; if if wine wine is is taken taken in in large large doses, doses, it it will will cause cause inflammatory inflammatory conditions, conditions, and and itit will will make make the the body body fragile fragile and and weak, weak, increases increases burning burning sensation sensation and and causes causes delusion. delusion. Hrerqdded weahtasasaet: Tet: ः क म नीया जा गलैः पलै ु दे दध ु वलं शाल पबे सं ना तघनं रसालां रागखा डवौ Wath ं प USER a Ady पानक चसारं वा नवमgiotet थतम ् ृ ाजने िRua मोचचोचदलै यु तं सा Arrddcckiad wedलं मyraerieasy: ृ मयशिु त भः पाटलावा Temaसतं चा Ue:भः सकप HH ूरं स Beto ुशीतलम ् During During summer, summer, boiled boiled rice, rice, which which is is white white in in colour, colour, (like (like full full moon) moon) should should be be eaten eaten along along with with meat meat of of animals animals of of desert. desert. Meat juice (Mamsarasa) Meat juice (Mamsarasa) which which is is not not very very thick, thick, Page Page No. No. 29 29 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Rasala Rasala (curds (curds churned churned and and mixed mixed with with pepper pepper powder powder and and sugar), sugar), Raga Raga (syrup (syrup which which is is sweet, sweet, sour sour and and salty) salty) and and Khandava Khandava (syrup (syrup which which has has all all the the tastes, tastes, prepared prepared with with many many substances), substances), Panaka Panaka panchasara, panchasara, (syrup (syrup prepared prepared with with raisins raisins (draksha), (draksha), madhuka, madhuka, dates dates (karjura), (karjura), kasmarya, kasmarya, and and parushaka parushaka fruits fruits all all in in equal equal quantities, quantities, cooled cooled and and added added with with powder powder of of cinnamon cinnamon leaves, leaves, cinnamon cinnamon and and cardamom cardamom etc) etc) and and kept kept inside inside aa fresh fresh mud mud pot, pot, along along with with leaves leaves of of plantain plantain and and coconut coconut trees, trees, and and made made sour sour (fermented) (fermented) should should be be drunk drunk in in mugs mugs of of mud mud or or shell; shell; Very Very cool cool water water kept kept in in mud mud pot pot along along with with flowers flowers of of patala patala and and karpura karpura (camphor) (camphor) should should be be used used for for drinking. drinking. शशा क करणान यान ् Laea रज यां भ यन ् पबेtatत ् MMSHAPLM eT ् भ ASAT ARAel स सतं मा हषं atीरं च aa Arey degraन शीतलम ् Food Food articles articles like like sasanka sasanka kirana kirana (hollow, (hollow, finger-like, finger-like, fried fried pastry pastry made made of of corn corn flour) flour) should should be be taken taken at at night; night; Buffalo Buffalo milk milk mixed mixed with with sugar sugar and and cooled cooled by by moonlight moonlight and and the the stars stars should should be be used used for for drinking. drinking. 33-36 33-36 अ कषमहाशालताल ो णरिAT मषु HASHIAC MA A ASETON वने माधवीिaco ल ट ाreaneaTHhMAy ा तवकशा लषु FAYषु ATTA स Srieaeawdaacsarargerterh ुगि ध हमपानीय स यमानपटा लके HAY Fler TAMA कायमाने चते च ूत वालफललeasy: ुि ब भः कदल दलक लारमMAHA ण पलैः HahleaheaARA A Aa: ृ ालकमालो कोमलै कुसुमपeH लवे Hae: ः कि Herdपते तdetपे हस MeHYAT म यं दनेअकतापातः Heathaaa: व या ारागहृ े अथवा FAMERS HVAT पु त ी del तनह ता य व cAMRATR Gea S CARAT ृ तोशीरवा रATण Day Day time time should should be be spent spent in in forests forests having having tall tall trees trees reaching reaching the the sky sky such such as as shala shala (Shorea (Shorea robusta, Borassus flabellifera flabellifera etc, robusta, Tala Tala – — Borassus etc, which which obstruct obstruct the the hot hot rays rays of of the the sun, sun, or or in in houses houses around around which which bunches bunches of of flowers flowers and and grapes grapes are are hanging hanging from from their their creepers. creepers. Sheets Sheets of of cloth cloth spreading spreading sweet sweet scented scented water, water, are are arranged arranged (to (to fan fan the the air) air) ,, all all around. around. Sleep Sleep on on soft soft bed bed prepared prepared with with flowers flowers of of banana, banana, kalbara, kalbara, lotus lotus etc. etc. with with fully fully blossomed blossomed flowers flowers place place all all over. over. Spend Spend the the day day remaining remaining inside inside the the house house cooled cooled by by water water fountains, fountains, water water being being scented scented with with usheera usheera (Cus (Cus Cus Cus grass), grass), and and thereby thereby relieve relieve yourself yourself from from the the heat heat of of the the sun. sun. नशाकरकराक ण सौधप नरासु च fererecarrhiot alerysdृ ठे fey T आसना He व थ च त य Tears च दना य मा लनः FACAACAET Arferet: नव ृ तकामत य स ाससः fGcdAAA CASAL ARTT: ुसू मतनुव जला तालव ृ ता न fase: व तत नीपुटाः Teeceageater wfetetryer: ृ ाः प उ ेपा च म द जलव Satieren: ष हमा नलाः SAMA Hace ृ ू ेपा sea कप रच दनाः HRACAaHAA Et: सह Teldec: ूरमि लकामाला हाराः Page Page No. No. 30 30 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan मनोहरकलालापाः शशवः AGT: सा रकाः श Aelerporora: Nera: ee: ुकाः Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan FUNATAM: Plea: म ण ताः WerpedihAatssde!: ो फु लकमलो वलाः ृ ालवलयाः का ज गमा sa इव प यताः Fo लमम ् SISTA Uealयो हरि atedत दaflar: Night Night regimen: regimen: At At nights, nights, one one should should sleep sleep on on the the terrace, terrace, facing facing moonlight. moonlight. Exhaustion Exhaustion due due to to heat heat of of the the day day is is relieved relieved by, by, anointing anointing the the body body with with paste paste of of sandalwood, sandalwood, wearing wearing garlands, garlands, avoidance avoidance of of sexual sexual activities, activities, wearing wearing of of very very light light and and thin thin dress, dress, by by fanning fanning with with fans fans made made of of leaves leaves of of Tala Tala or or large large leaves leaves of of padmini padmini (lily) (lily) made made wet; wet; syringes syringes sprinkling sprinkling cool cool water water softly, jasmine and softly, garlands garlands of of flowers flowers of of camphor, camphor, jasmine and of of pearls pearls and and beads beads of of white white sandal sandal paste, paste, children, children, sarika sarika (mynah (mynah bird) bird) and and shuka shuka (parrot) (parrot) talking talking pleasantly; pleasantly; beautiful beautiful woman woman wearing wearing bangles bangles of of soft soft lotus lotus stalk, stalk, blossoms blossoms of of lotus lotus in in their their hair, hair, moving moving about about nearby. nearby. 5. 5. Varsha Varsha Ritu Ritu caryacarya- (Ayurveda (Ayurveda seasonal seasonal regimen regimen for for rainy rainy season) season) – — Mid Mid July July – — Mid Mid September: September: आदान लानवपष Me AMAA Featनो अ HTTप सीद Hahaत ु TAामि न स वषास दोषैद ु यि त aते अ बुल बा बुदे अ astg ु atigsaiea sarrqaraege Wrayबरे Ro) a 2 सत ष म ता सहसा ATI AAT शीतले elroyन च T ु ारे ण ASAT 2 भ ेन म लनेन च रणा STASUIHAFAM Afolrey DT वा ATROT ूबा पेणअ लपाकeA वि ननैव च दे न , ते ि व य यो अ यद ू षषु Serta T म Arca, Aaa HeasIay TAMU AASV UT ् भजे साधारणं सवम ू मण तेजनं Tच यत In In rainy rainy season, season, the the agni agni (digestive (digestive activity) activity) is is weak. weak. It It is is already already debilitated debilitated by by summer, summer, it it undergoes undergoes further further decrease decrease and and gets gets vitiated vitiated by by the the Doshas. Doshas. The The Doshas Doshas get get aggravated aggravated by by the the effect effect of of thick thick clouds clouds full full of of water, water, cold cold wind wind having having snow, snow, dirty dirty water water because because of of rain, rain, warmth warmth of of the the earth earth and and sourness. sourness. The The poor poor strength strength of of digestive digestive activity activity the the Doshas Doshas start start vitiating vitiating one one another another and and cause cause many many diseases. diseases. Hence Hence all all general general measures measures to to mitigate mitigate imbalanced imbalanced Doshas Doshas and and to to improve improve digestive digestive activity activity should should be be adopted. adopted. 42-44 42-44 आ थापनं श HEM Mech Mesयं रसान Cel ् क Haley ु तनुज ण धा ृ तान ् जा गलं प शतं यूषान ् म व र टं चर तनम ् म चकोलावचू णतम ् Hedतु सौवचला dladenresयं वा at पusaantoraraa fect ectतृ ं चा aresitभो भोजनं sitatet cafag द यं ate कौपं श व तदtee ु दने AFAFAAMIAS Hash य ता ललवणा नेहं सं शु कं algdoary ौ व लघु One One should should undergo undergo Panchakarma Panchakarma therapies. therapies. After After that that the the person person should should also also be be administered administered asthapana asthapana basti basti (decoction (decoction enema enema therapy). therapy). He juice processed He should should use use old old grains grains for for food, food, meat meat juice processed with with spices spices etc. etc. Meat Meat of of animals animals of of desert-like desert-like lands, lands, soup soup of of pulses pulses ,, wine wine prepared prepared from from grapes grapes and and fermented fermented decoctions, decoctions, which which are are old old or or mastu mastu (whey, (whey, thin thin water water or or curds) curds) processed processed with with more more of of Sochal Sochal Page Page No. No. 31 31 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan salt salt and and powder powder of of panchakola, panchakola, should should be be used. used. Rain Rain water water or or water water from from deep deep wells, wells, well well boiled boiled should should be be used used for for drinking. drinking. On On days days of of no no sunlight sunlight at at all, all, the the food food should should predominantly predominantly sour, sour, salty salty and and unctuous, unctuous, dry, dry, mixed mixed with with honey honey and and easily easily digestible. digestible. 45-46 45-46 ½ 4 अपादचार SOG स AN: Ace ध ETAT: ुर भः सततं ू पता बरः ह यप ृ ठे Tcarvaefrasitantatsra वसे बा पशीतशीकरविजते sass Person Person should should not not move move about about on on foot foot (move (move only only on on vehicles) vehicles) should should use use perfumes, perfumes, expose expose his his clothes clothes to to fragrant fragrant fumes, fumes, dwell dwell in in upper upper stories stories of of the the house, house, devoid devoid of of heat, heat, cold cold and and snow. snow. नद जलोदम थाहः ACT व नायासातपां यजेत ् AC aAMGAe US AAT AT eS, Avoid Avoid -- River River water, water, udamantha udamantha (beverage (beverage prepared prepared with with flour flour of of corns corns mixed mixed with with ghee), ghee), sleeping sleeping at at daytime, daytime, exertion exertion and and exposure exposure to to Sun. Sun. 48 48 6. 6. Sharath Sharath Ritucharya Ritucharya – — (Ayurveda (Ayurveda autumn autumn regimen) regimen) – — Mid Mid September September —– Mid Mid November: November: वषाशीतो चता गानां Tecan सहसैवाकरि easy: म भः astetcaliarsanat त तानां Birad सि चतं व प तं शर aan qset exisद क Heater ु यत ृ टौ edt त जयाय घत ृ ं त तं वरे को र तमो णम ् The The person person becomes becomes accustomed accustomed to to the the cold cold of of rainy rainy season. season. When When he he gets gets suddenly suddenly exposed exposed to to the the warm warm rays rays of of Sun, Sun, the the Pitta, Pitta, which which has has undergone undergone increase increase in in Varsha Varsha (rainy (rainy season) season) becomes becomes greatly greatly aggravated aggravated during during sharath sharath (autumn). (autumn). In In order order to to get get over over it, it, Tikta Tikta ghrita ghrita (medicated (medicated ghee ghee recipe recipe described described in in the the treatment treatment of of kustha kustha chapter chapter 19 19 of of Chikitsa Chikitsa sthana), sthana), purgation purgation therapy therapy and and blood blood letting letting should should be be resorted resorted to. to. 49 49 ½ % त तं Fag वाद ु कषायं ु धतो अ लघु fata HIS चoT Val Hetनं भजे Asleoory शा लमु ग सताधा गलम ् emferqest areataीपटोलमध ererare ुजाSATA, ‘ When When hungry, hungry, the the person person should should take take foods foods which which are are of of bitter, bitter, sweet sweet and and astringent astringent tastes, tastes, and and easily easily digestible digestible such such as as Rice, Rice, green green gram, gram, sugar, sugar, Amla, Amla, Patola, Patola, honey honey and and meat meat of of animals animals of of desert-like desert-like lands. lands. 50 50 ½ 4 Hamsodaka Hamsodaka -त तं Aree: त तांशु करणै: शीतं रि म भ: ॥| PAea सम तात ्AHERN अ यहोरा ंseTecHes अग योदयfahay न वषम|् । Area efter शीतां efrarerlशु TRA: श हंसोदकं aA नाम fertet नमलं Acisissr मलिज जलम ् ॥Il aSaieg ना भ यि द न पाना दषु sea अम त ard 7 aTवा HAT ं TeTay ु च sah ृ ोपमम ् ।| taptaṃ taptam taptāṃśukiraṇai: taptamsukiranai: śītaṃ Sitam śītāṃśu sitamsu raśmibhi: raSmibhi: ||| samantāt samantat apyahorātraṃ apyahoratram agastyodaya agastyodaya nirviṣam nirvisam || śuci suci haṃsodakaṃ hamsodakam nāma nama nirmalaṃ nirmalam malajijjalam malajijjalam ||| nābhiṣyandi nabhisyandi na na vā va rūkṣaṃ riksam pānādiṣu panadisu amṛtopamam amrtopamam || The The water water which which gets gets heated heated by by the the hot hot rays rays of of the the sun sun during during day day cooled cooled by by the the cool cool rays rays of of the the moon moon during during night, night, for for many many days days continuously, continuously, which which has has been been de-poisoned de-poisoned (detoxicated) (detoxicated) by by Page Page No. No. 32 32 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan the the rise rise of of the the star star Agatya, Agatya, which which is is pure, pure, uncontaminated uncontaminated and and capable capable of of mitigating mitigating the the malas malas (dosas) (dosas) is is known known as as Hamsodaka. Hamsodaka. It It is is neither neither abhisyandi abhisyandi (producing (producing more more secretion secretion or or moisture moisture inside inside the the minute minute channels channels so so as as to to block block them) them) nor nor dry, dry, such such water water is is like like Amrita Amrita (nector) (nector) for for drinking drinking and and other other purpose. purpose. 51-52 51-52 urea ina Qatar च दनोशीरकप वसनो वलः ूरमु ता aealsoret: सौधे सौधधवलां चि alayषु alaedent ulesकां रजनीम toreiegaुखे Evening Evening should should be be spent spent on on the the terraces terraces of of houses houses which which are are white white (by (by painting), painting), anointing anointing the the body body with with the the paste paste of of Sandalwood, Sandalwood, Cus Cus Cus Cus grass, grass, Camphor, Camphor, wearing wearing garlands garlands of of pearls pearls and and shining shining dress dress and and enjoying enjoying the the moonlight. moonlight. तष TINA ु ार ारसौ ह यद ल वसातपान are धतैtora ATL ् ती णम य दवा व नपुरarate ोवातान ् TSI प र यजेत ् Hevrrcatararer Avoid Avoid exposure exposure to to snow snow (mist), (mist), indulgence indulgence in in alkaline alkaline substances, substances, satiation satiation with with hearty hearty meal, meal, use use of of curds, curds, oil, oil, muscle muscle fat, fat, exposure exposure to to sunlight, sunlight, strong strong liquors, liquors, sleeping sleeping at at day day time time and and the the eastern eastern breeze. breeze. 54 54 ½ '4 Use Use of of taste taste as as per per season: season: शीते वषासु weasel चा यां ीन ् Wed वस ते अ यान ् रसा भजेत ् id asty Fecal Walesa वादं ु ferare, नदाघे , शर वाद ु तrap तकषायकान Fang, eeeद Tag MAHI ् added ela TA eeeaay: शर वस तयो war ं शीतं घमघना तयोः अ नपानं FAM समासेन fatal वपर तमतो 3a अ यथा See During During winters, winters, (Hemanta (Hemanta and and Shishira) Shishira) and and varsa varsa (rainy (rainy season), season), Sweet, Sweet, Sour Sour and and salt salt tastes tastes should should be be especially especially used. used. Bitter, Bitter, pungent pungent and and astringent astringent tastes tastes should should be be used used more more during during vasanta vasanta (spring (spring season), season), Sweet Sweet taste taste should should be be used used more more during during Nidagha Nidagha (summer); (summer); and and Sweet, Sweet, bitter bitter and and astringent astringent tastes tastes should should be be used used during during Sharath Sharath (autumn). (autumn). Qualities Qualities of of food food as as per per season: season: The The food food and and drink drink should should be be dry dry (moisture (moisture less, less, fat-less) fat-less) during during Sharat Sharat and and Vasanta Vasanta (autumn (autumn and and spring) spring) and and food food should should be be cold cold during during gharma gharma (summer) (summer) and and ghnanta ghnanta (end (end of of rainy rainy season) season) and and should should be be hot hot in in other other seasons. seasons. 55-56. 55-56. न यं सवरसा यास: Faeaaersyargat व वा ध यमत fica TaeTSI: ृ ावत ृ ौ ॥Il nityaṃ nityam sarvarasābhyāsa: sarvarasabhyasa: svasvādhikyamṛtāvṛtau svasvadhikyamrtavrtau ||| The The habit habit of of using using all all the the six six tastes tastes every every day day is is ideal ideal for for maintenance maintenance of of health. health. However, However, during during particular particular seasons, seasons, the the particular particular tastes tastes should should be be given given special special emphasis. emphasis. 57. 57. Page Page No. No. 33 33 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan RitusandhiRitusandhi- (inter-seasonal (inter-seasonal period) period) ::ऋ वो: Hecate अ या द Aca स ताहौ Raia ऋतस मत पूव fatrecaiss: व ध या य: Aaeitat सेवनीयो sks अपरळ् HAT मात ् Re: ay Yat ु ि ध र त CAA: ृ : ।| त ॥| असा यजा ह रोगा: य : सहसा यागशीलनात ॥ ् race fF Ver: SI: ु AEM cArereflerearL Il ṛtvo: rtvo: antyādi antyadi saptāhau saptahau ṛtusandhiriti rtusandhiriti smṛta: smrta: || tatra tatra pūrvo ptirvo vidhistyājya: vidhistyajya: sevanīyo sevaniyo aparaḻ aparal kramāt kramat ||| asātmyajā asatmyaja hi hi rogā: roga: syu: syu: sahasā sahasa tyāgaśīlanāt tyagasilanat ||| The The seven seven days days at at the the end end and and commencement commencement of of aa season season is is known known as as Rtusandhi Rtusandhi (inter (inter seasonal seasonal period). period). During During this this period, period, the the regimen regimen of of the the preceding preceding season season should should be be discontinued discontinued gradually gradually and and that that of of the the succeeding succeeding season season should should be be gradually gradually adopted; adopted; sudden sudden discontinuance discontinuance or or sudden sudden adoption adoption gives gives rise rise to to diseases diseases caused caused by by asatmya asatmya (non-habituation). (non-habituation). 58-59 58-59 ½ 4 Thus Thus ends ends the the chapterchapter- named named Ritucayra, Ritucayra, the the third third of of Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Astanga Astanga Hridaya Hridaya samhita samhita composed composed by by Srimad Srimad Vagbhata, Vagbhata, Son Son of of Sri Sri Vaidyapati Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Simhagupta. Page Page No. No. 34 34 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter रोगानुcares पादनीय Chapter 4: 4: Roganutpadaniya Roganutpadaniya Verret Preventive Preventive Healthcare Healthcare The The fourth fourth chapter chapter of of Astanga Astanga Hridaya Hridaya is is called called as as Roganutpadaniya Roganutpadaniya Adhyaya Adhyaya – — Preventive Preventive healthcare healthcare tips. tips. it it explains explains the the method method of of adjusting adjusting the the body body to to the the natural natural signs signs so so as as to to avoid avoid toxic toxic material material accumulation accumulation and and onset onset of of disease disease process. process. Meaning Meaning of of the the chapter chapter name: name: Roganutpadaneeya Roganutpadaneeya = = Roga Roga + + Anutpadaneeya Anutpadaneeya Roga Roga means means disease disease Utpadana Utpadana means means production. production. Anutpadana Anutpadana means means prevention prevention of of production. production. So, So, Roga Roga Anutpadaneeya Anutpadaneeya means means – — prevention prevention of of onset onset of of disease. disease. This This chapter chapter deals deals with with preventive preventive healthcare. healthcare. अधारणीय ar वे ग sano Adharaneeya Adharaneeya Vega Vega – — Natural Natural urges urges that that should should not not be be suppressed suppressed वे गा न MA धारये CAवात व मुTaraवतCATE SMe AAV ृ ुधाम ् न ाकास म LATS वासजFHTA छ रेL त साम ् 11 PASIAN TATA ृ भा ु COE SNAADWPWNE One One should should not not suppress suppress these these natural natural urges urges -1. Adhovata Adhovata – — flatus flatus (fart) (fart) 2. Vit Vit – — faeces faeces 3. Mutra Mutra —– urine urine 4. Kshavatu Kshavatu —– sneeze sneeze 5. Trut Trut —– thirst thirst 6. Kshudha Kshudha – — hunger hunger 7. Nidra Nidra —– sleep sleep 8. Kasa Kasa —– cough cough 9. Shramashvasa 9. Shramashvasa —– breathing breathing on on exertion exertion 10. 10. Jrumbha Jrumbha —– Yawning Yawning 11. 11. Ashru Ashru —– tears, tears, weeping weeping 12. 12. Chardi Chardi—– vomiting vomiting 13. 13. Retas Retas —– semen semen All All these these natural natural urges urges should should not not be be suppressed suppressed by by force. force. Page Page No. No. 35 35 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan अधोवातरोध 3eiaTaReT Adhovata Adhovata abrodha abrodha —– adverse adverse effects effects of of suppressing suppressing flatus flatus – — Helaraeaय रोधे Veaन अधोवात WoHlelad ग ु मोदावत wrroar: लमाः वातमAIPASTEvCa यिsera नवध gaaTar: AA ू श ु स ग ु गदाः 22 By By suppression suppression of of the the urge urge of of flatus flatus (farting), (farting), on on aa continuous continuous basis, basis, one one becomes becomes prone prone to to abdominal abdominal bloating, bloating, tumor, tumor, Udavarta Udavarta —– bloating, bloating, gaseous gaseous distension distension of of abdomen abdomen Ruk Ruk —– abdominal abdominal pain pain Klama tiredness, exhaustion Klama — –tiredness, exhaustion without without doing doing anything anything blockage blockage of of flatus, flatus, constipation constipation and and difficulty difficulty in in urination urination loss loss of of vision vision and and loss loss of of digestive digestive power power diseases diseases related related to to upper upper part part of of stomach stomach and and heart heart This This is is because because – — the the Vata Vata gets gets obstructed obstructed in in intestine intestine by by avoiding avoiding farting. farting. At At intestines intestines and and rectum, rectum, natural natural movement movement of of Vata Vata is is downward. downward. But But because because of of suppression suppression of of flatus, flatus, Vata Vata moves moves in in upward upward direction direction and and causes causes all all these these problems. problems. Most Most of of the the problems problems explained explained are are due due to to Vata Vata imbalance. imbalance. परु ष रोध airs We Bad Bad effects effects of of suppressing suppressing urge urge to to defecate defecate —– Shakrut Shakrut Nirodhaja Nirodhaja Roga Roga – — शक apd:ृ तः प डीको वे ट fae त याय Rat: शरो जः ostaease ऊ ववायुः पर कत gaaeanteey दय योपरोधनम ् aeday: Wredt मुखेन facudicaes व विृ त च प मत Haat yalfraread aaa: Ea: 3-4 ूव ता च आमयाः ृ ाः 3-4 Pindikodveshta Pindikodveshta —– twisting twisting pain pain of of calf calf muscles muscles Pratishyaya Pratishyaya – — running running nose nose Shiroruja Shiroruja – — headache headache Urdhvavayu Urdhvavayu – — upward upward movement movement of of Vata, Vata, Parikarta Parikarta – — anal anal itching itching sensation sensation Hrudayasya stiffening feeling Hrudayasya Uparodhana Uparodhana -—–stiffening feeling in in chest chest region region Mukhena Mukhena Vit Vit pravrutti pravrutti—– foul foul breath, breath, feces feces vomiting. vomiting. Bad Bad Effects Effects due due to to Suppression Suppression of of urination: urination: अ गभ गा मर बि तमे वं णवे दनाः म पूव Fare tereyd ू य रोधा च a ायो रोगाः rat wee: Angabhanga Angabhanga – — body body pain, pain, Ashmari Ashmari —– Urinary Urinary calculi calculi Pain Pain in in penis penis and and bladder bladder region. region. Diseases Diseases that that are are mentioned mentioned in in flatus flatus and and faeces faeces may may also also occur occur in in this this condition. condition. Page Page No. No. 36 36 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Treatment Treatment for for suppression suppression of of flatus, flatus, feces feces and and urine urine —– तदौषधं aft वत अ य ग Hameed अवगाह च tdeal वेदनं aeawA बि तकम च aalsel 333ga a अ नपानं oT च fag व He भे द Hetet व रोधो थेषु य fag delay gesमसु To To treat treat the the diseases diseases arising arising from from suppression suppression of of flatus, flatus, feces feces and and urine, urine, the the following following should should be be given. given. Varti Varti – — Rectal Rectal and and urethral urethral suppositories suppositories Abhyanga Abhyanga – — Oil Oil massage massage Avagaha tub bath, Avagaha – — tub bath, sitz sitz bath bath Svedana Svedana – — sweating sweating therapy, therapy, sudation sudation therapy therapy Bastikarma Bastikarma —– rectal rectal enema enema Annapaanam all food Annapaanam ca ca vidbhedhi vidbhedhi —–all food that that help help to to induce induce purgation purgation should should be be administered. administered. Treatment Treatment of of diseases diseases due due to to suppression suppression of of urination urination urge urge – — म FIAT ू जेष2 ु Iत ु Nn पाने च ा भ तं शead यते घत Wel west ृ म् जीणाि तकं चो तमया मा या योजना वयम ् अवपीडकमे त च AAA सं तम MOCHA: HasHAaed ् धारणा पुन : ६Tk ७ls In In diseases diseases caused caused by by suppression suppression of of urine, urine, drinking drinking of of ghee ghee before before lunch lunch is is idea. idea. Drinking Drinking ghee ghee in in the the maximum maximum dose dose at at the the end end of of digestion digestion of of meal meal of of both both the the midday midday and and the the night night is is also also advised. advised. Such Such aa process process of of drinking drinking high high doses doses of of ghee ghee is is called called as as Avapidaka Avapidaka Sneha. Sneha. Suppression Suppression of of belching: belching: उ गार या चः HET क पो faseeit वब धो SeSINEAR: दयोरसोः aaa: आ मानकास ecard ह मा च Reataeds ह माव त AVS भेषजम ् ८¢ SATA Suppression Suppression of of belching belching may may cause cause Aruchi Aruchi – — Anorexia, Anorexia, lack lack of of interest interest in in taking taking food food Kampa Kampa —– tremors tremors Vibandha constipation Vibandha —–constipation Hrudayo stiffening sensation Hrudayo Raso Raso —–stiffening sensation in in chest chest region region Adhmana bloating, gaseous Adhmana —–bloating, gaseous distension distension of of abdomen abdomen Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, cold cold Hidhma Hidhma —– hiccup hiccup The The treatment treatment for for this this is is similar similar to to treatment treatment for for suppression suppression of of hiccups. hiccups. Page Page No. No. 37 37 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Suppression Suppression of of sneezing: sneezing: RNidtireadlieraAeaedsMied शरोत ि यदौब यम या तंभा दतं atc: ुतेः Suppression Suppression of of sneezing sneezing may may cause cause —– Shiro Shiro Arti Arti—– headache headache Indriya Indriya Daurbalya Daurbalya – — weakness weakness of of sense sense organs organs Manyasthamba Manyasthamba – — Neck Neck stiffness stiffness Ardita Ardita —– Facial Facial palsy palsy Treatment: Treatment: ती ाणनावनाक Peoणधe Are Te MUTA etch letवलोकनै ot chet:ः ूमा जना वतय ु त ं Brat स तां Tretael नेह वे दौ च Vadacaicd a शीलये effetत ् Teekshna Teekshna Dhooma Dhooma – — powerful powerful herbal herbal smoking, smoking, Anjana Anjana – — Collyrium Collyrium Navana Navana – — Snuffing Snuffing Arkavilokana Arkavilokana – — seeing seeing Sun Sun directly directly for for aa few few seconds seconds Massage, Massage, Oleation Oleation and and sudation sudation therapies therapies are are also also mentioned mentioned as as treatment. treatment. All All these these are are done done to to induce induce sneezing sneezing and and to to regularize regularize Vata Vata movement. movement. Suppression Suppression of of thirst thirst – — Nest TW धय BEATS शोषा ग Me साद बा स मोह BAAम BeeTeT: गदाः त ृ णाया feraerel न हात ् त सव Tora AA शीतः eft: Sah व ध हतः १० fateriga: vo Suppression Suppression of of thirst thirst causes causes Shosha Shosha —– Emaciation Emaciation Angasada debility, weakness Angasada —–debility, weakness Badhirya Badhirya —– deafness deafness Sammoha loss of Sammoha – — loss of consciousness, consciousness, delusion delusion Bhrama Bhrama —– delusion delusion Hrut Hrut Gada Gada – — cardiac cardiac disorder disorder Treatment: Treatment: त व ध हतः १० aa शीतः efta: सव aaf Taferiga: go All All procedures procedures that that are are cooling cooling in in nature nature – — like like cold cold water water drinking, drinking, cold cold water water bath bath etc etc is is recommended. recommended. Page Page No. No. 38 38 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Suppression Suppression of of hunger: hunger: अ गभ ग HOTA अ च Totes ला न HTL का य श माः ae:ुधः ११ HSAs Vorूल IAT: ke Angabhanga Angabhanga – — bodyache, bodyache, myalgia myalgia Aruchi Aruchi – — Anorexia, Anorexia, lack lack of of interest interest in in taking taking food food Glani Glani —– debility debility Karshya Karshya —– emaciation, emaciation, weight weight loss loss Shoola Shoola —– abdominal abdominal colic colic pain pain Bhrama Bhrama —– delusion delusion Treatment: Treatment: त यो यं qAaAsa लघु िStee न धं उ ay Sefणं अ Hedपं च aT भोजनम soe ् Light Light meals, meals, with with oily oily substance substance (such (such as as ghee), ghee), which which is is hot/warm hot/warm in in nature. nature. Note: Note: Fasting Fasting causes causes decrease decrease in in digestion digestion power power and and increase increase in in Vata. Vata. If If you you take take aa large large meal meal after after fasting fasting for for long, long, then then it it will will further further decrease decrease digestion digestion power. power. Hence Hence a a light light meal meal is is advised. advised. Oily Oily substance substance such such as as ghee ghee soothes soothes gastric gastric mucosa. mucosa. Hot/warm Hot/warm food food helps helps to to maintain maintain Agni Agni (digestion (digestion power). power). Suppression Suppression of of sleep: sleep: न ाया Ale मोह FUrer मूधा गौरवाल य oie जिृ erar: भकाः ferarar aitarerea अ गमद च HSTACLT त इ टः AT B8C: व नः Haleelfer संवाहना न च CaCl: T १२ 82 Suppression Suppression of of sleep sleep causes causes Moha delusion Moha —–delusion Murdha Murdha Akshi Akshi Gourava Gourava – — heaviness heaviness of of head head and and eyes eyes Alasya laziness, lassitude Alasya – — laziness, lassitude Jrumbhika Jrumbhika —– yawning yawning Angabhanga Angabhanga – — bodyache, bodyache, myalgia myalgia Treatment: व नः सं वाहना न चDT Sleep Treatment: त AI इ SSC:टः Facet: Aaleetlfel Sleep and and massage. massage. Suppression Suppression of of cough: cough: कास य रोधात त व ृ ः Laraefel वासा च FaTAAT: दामयाः १३ PRES Ved ् acd: 23 eet हear शोषो मा a, च, HR काय aa अ Herat कासहासुतरां Tate: व धः Page Page No. No. 39 39 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan By By suppressing suppressing cough, cough, it it further further increases. increases. It It further further may may lead lead to to Shvasa Shvasa – — Asthma, Asthma, COPD, COPD, wheezing, wheezing, breathing breathing difficulty difficulty Aruchi Aruchi – — Anorexia, Anorexia, lack lack of of interest interest in in taking taking food food Hrudamaya Hrudamaya —– cardiac cardiac disorder disorder Shosha Shosha —– Emaciation Emaciation Hidhma Hidhma —– hiccup hiccup Treatment कासहासुतरां fafer: व धः All Treatment –— काय HI अ 377 PRET All treatment treatment which which relieves relieves cough cough (Regular (Regular treatment treatment to to cough) cough) should should be be given. given. Suppression Suppression of of breathing breathing on on exertion: exertion: ग Tea ु म मोहाः THAT म वासा ACMA वधा रतात ् १४ Saleोग सAFA: ¢¥ Avoiding Avoiding heavy heavy breathing breathing after after heavy heavy work work may may lead lead to to Gulma Gulma —– Abdominal Abdominal tumor, tumor, bloating bloating HrudrogaHrudroga- Cardiac Cardiac disorder disorder Sammoha loss of Sammoha – — loss of consciousness, consciousness, delusion delusion Treatment: Treatment: हतं Taxaot व मणं aa त aTaeatga वात न च raha: या मः fed Vishrama rest Vishrama —–rest Vata Vata balancing balancing treatment. treatment. Suppression Suppression of of yawning: yawning: ज FFT: ृ भायाः वव ोगाः सव चा नलिज व धः १५ aaa: Aavarferelfsralaneal: ¢5 The The suppression suppression of of yawning yawning produces produces similar similar symptoms symptoms to to that that of of suppression suppression of of sneezing. sneezing. Here, Here, Vata Vata balancing balancing activities/treatment activities/treatment should should be be taken taken up. up. Suppression Suppression of of tears tears पीनसा RN शरोeae द FARA म याeae तंभा aaa: च माः CleTaTIA सग ु मा बा पतः त व नो Hea म यं Har: याः कथाः SICA TA: AT Fatal HAT: १६ v6 Suppression Suppression ofof tears tears causes causes Peenasa Peenasa —– running running nose, nose, rhinitis rhinitis Akshi Akshi Roga Roga —– eye eye disorders disorders Hridrik Hridrik —– heart heart diseases diseases associated associated with with pain pain Manyasthamba Manyasthamba – — Neck Neck stiffness stiffness Page Page No. No. 40 40 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Aruchi Aruchi – — Anorexia, Anorexia, lack lack of of interest interest in in taking taking food food Bhrama Bhrama —– delusion delusion Gulma Gulma —– Abdominal Abdominal tumor, tumor, bloating bloating Treatment: Treatment: sleep, sleep, alcohol alcohol and and sweet sweet talk talk with with friends friends and and family. family. Suppression Suppression of of vomiting: vomiting: faMtHogrs aaa: वसपकोठकु ठ WieHvguesq अ क डूपा वामय वराः सकास वास eeoaeaAsVdyadl लास य ग वयथवो + AH: वमेः १७oe PHC Suppression Suppression of of vomiting vomiting causes causes Visarpa Visarpa – — Herpes, Herpes, spreading spreading skin skin disease disease Kotha allergic skin Kotha – — allergic skin rashes rashes Kushta Kushta – — skin skin diseases diseases Akshi Akshi Roga Roga —– eye eye disorders disorders Kandu Kandu —– itching itching sensation sensation Pandu Pandu —– Anemia, Anemia, intial intial stages stages of of liver liver diseases diseases Jvara Jvara – — fever fever Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, cold cold Shwasa Shwasa – — Asthma, Asthma, COPD, COPD, wheezing, wheezing, breathing breathing difficulty difficulty Hrullasa Hrullasa —– nausea nausea – — vomiting vomiting sensation sensation Vyanga Vyanga —– Pigmented Pigmented patches patches on on face face Shvayathu Shvayathu —– oedema, oedema, inflammation inflammation Treatment: Treatment: ग डूषधुमानाहारा TOSIYAAERT Bal ं भ FCAT AqaqgaA: ु वा तद ु वमः CHA: ETतं UTA 8¢ यायामः OTALAET चा FaraeTy वरे चनम ् १८ ु तर य श स ारलवणं तै लम य गाथ 7च श यते aanaay dass read Gandusha gargling Gandusha —–gargling Dhumapana herbal smoke Dhumapana – — herbal smoke Rooksha eating dry Rooksha aahara aahara Vamana Vamana —–eating dry food food and and inducing inducing vomiting vomiting Vyayama Vyayama —– exercise exercise Asra Asra Sruti Sruti—– Blood Blood letting letting (in (in case case of of skin skin diseases) diseases) Virechana Virechana —– purgation purgation type type of of Panchakarma Panchakarma treatment. treatment. Note: Note: Suppression Suppression of of vomiting vomiting causes causes Pitta Pitta imbalance. imbalance. Hence Hence most most of of the the treatment treatment above above is is targeted targeted to to balance balance or or eliminate eliminate Pitta. Pitta. Page Page No. No. 41 41 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Suppression Suppression of of Semen Semen ejaculation: ejaculation: श ना वयथु वराःSAT: १९ UAcACHAM °8 ु ा त वणं गEAI ु यवेदALIAY FOCUM AAS MSAMASAGA ह यथाम गभ गव ृ CALAIS: य मष ढताः ू स गा Suppression Suppression of of ejaculation ejaculation causes causes Sravana Sravana – — oozing oozing of of semen semen Guhya pain in Guhya Vedana Vedana —–pain in groin groin Shvayathu Shvayathu —– oedema, oedema, inflammation inflammation Jvara Jvara – — fever fever Hrid Hrid Vyatha Vyatha – — cardiac cardiac pain, pain, distress distress Mutrasanga Mutrasanga – — Obstruction Obstruction to to the the flow flow of of urine urine and and difficulty difficulty Angabhanga Angabhanga – — bodyache, bodyache, myalgia myalgia Vruddhi Vruddhi – — Hernia Hernia Ashma Ashma —– stone stone formation formation Shandata Shandata – — Impotency Impotency Treatment: Treatment: ता चूडसुराशा लब AAS य य ग HAM अवगाहनम TAGE SAF ् २० Yo बि तशु करैः Hg स ं भजे याः िfer:यः aRayiaat: soicaitीरं Tar: Tamrachuda Tamrachuda – — chicken, chicken, Sura Sura —– beer, beer, alcohol alcohol Shali rice Shali —–rice Basti Basti abhyanga abhyanga – — massage massage to to the the lower lower abdomen abdomen Avagaha Avagaha – — immersion immersion bath bath with with oil oil Bastishuddhi Bastishuddhi —– cleansing cleansing of of urinary urinary bladder bladder with with enema enema Ksheera Ksheera —– treatment treatment with with milk milk processed processed with with herbs herbs Priya Priya Striyaha Striyaha —– copulation copulation Whom Whom should should not not be be given given treatment? treatment? त ृ शूलात यजेत ् ीणं व वमं वेगरो धनम ् Who Who have have intense intense pain pain and and thirst, thirst, those those who who are are habituated habituated to to suppression suppression of of urges urges – — because because the the Vata Vata and and other other Doshas Doshas will will frequently frequently get get vitiated vitiated due due to to undesired undesired activity activity and and treatment treatment will will not not be be successful. successful. Ksheena Ksheena – — who who are are severely severely emaciated, emaciated, Those Those who who vomit vomit faeces faeces – — condition condition has has gone gone out out of of control control Page Page No. No. 42 42 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Root Root cause cause for for all all diseases diseases wer: ad afप जाय aadते वेsaiteorenct: रोगाः सव अ गोद रणधारणैः न द टं साधनं fries weet तar भafasd FI ु तान cel ् Tierत २२ 2 ू य ठं Aये त तत चाने कधा WA: ायः पवना य कु य त ARUAHUM Yaa UPA अ नपानौषधं त HATA ACAय य Brokat ु जीतातो अन ल HeToATeAH 2 ु ोमनम ् २३ All All diseases diseases are are caused caused due due to to Vegodeerana initiation of Vegodeerana —–initiation of urges urges forcefully forcefully Vegadhaarana Vegadhaarana – — Suppression Suppression of of naturally naturally initiated initiated urges. urges. For For those those common common diseases diseases arising arising from from these these acts, acts, specific specific treatments treatments have have been been counted counted so so far. far. By By disturbing disturbing the the nature, nature, itit is is Vata Vata that that is is mainly mainly vitiated. vitiated. Hence Hence the the symptoms symptoms arising arising from from suppression suppression of of natural natural urges urges could could be be treatment treatment with with food food and and treatment treatment which which clear clear the the passages passages of of Vata Vata and and help help in in restoring restoring Vata’s Vata’s natural natural movement movement direction. direction. धारणीय गा: –— Urges emia वे aa: Urges that that should should be be suppressed suppressed —– धारये गान ् edt हतैषी unaedतु सदा Wel वेaanel चेह च weaय de 7 लोभ ई या वेष मा सयरागाद नां िजते ि यः २४ ote Saree sae Fata: IY The The urges urges that that should should be be suppressed suppressed forcefully forcefully are are —– Lobha Lobha – — greed greed Irshya Irshya – — envy envy Dvesha Dvesha – — hatredness hatredness Matsarya jealous Matsarya – — jealous Raga Raga —– unlawful, unlawful, excessive excessive attraction attraction Shodhana –Panchakarma—–purification purification procedure Shodhana —Panchakarma procedure —– timing timing यतेत ् चFT BA यथा Het कालं Ace मलानां शोधनं अ यथ asad सि चता ते feह Hal: Fad eter vidत seat ु ाः युज वति Fgoi fa tead:छदः One One must must exercise exercise precaution precaution to to clear clear out out Doshas Doshas and and waste waste products products at at suitable suitable times. times. Accumulation Accumulation of of such such toxins toxins could could lead lead to to their their aggravation aggravation and and subsequently subsequently even even death death may may occur occur due due to to this. this. Effectiveness Effectiveness of of Shodhana Shodhana —– (Panchakarma (Panchakarma treatment) treatment) दोषाः च कु यि त frat िजता asee ल घनuae: पाचनैः ये संशोधनैः श तेषां YoreRa: पन वः २६ ast: कदा Hafdepeaied J तq ु Belleed: Wer a AM % ु ा न ु The The Doshas Doshas that that are are balanced balanced out out by by Langhana Langhana (fasting (fasting etc) etc) and and Pachana Pachana (digestion (digestion promoting) promoting) therapies therapies may may sometime sometime get get re-aggravated re-aggravated soon. soon. However, However, Doshas Doshas that that have have been been eliminated eliminated out out with with Shodhna Shodhna (Panchakarma) (Panchakarma) therapy therapy will will never never get get re-aggravated. re-aggravated. Page Page No. No. 43 43 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan यथा योजये त ् BIAमं यथायोगमत BATA ऊ Hedव vars रसायना स ान व वत ् Tear न Rarer Gaara arora ृ ययोगां च काल After After proper proper Panchakarma Panchakarma procedure procedure at at suitable suitable times, times, rejuvenation rejuvenation treatment treatment (Rasayana (Rasayana therapy) therapy) should should be be taken taken up, up, with with suitable suitable tonics tonics and and aphrodisiacs. aphrodisiacs. Treatment Treatment for for those those who who undergo undergo Panchakarma Panchakarma treatment treatment and and who who feel feel tired: tired: भे षज पते प यमाहारै बहणं मात ् TISTAI WIATENIS HATA ृ शा टकगोधम त eforलषि s Sepa STARAसघATS ू मुe गमां ृ ा द1:भः यद पनभे ष य संTang योगा raaisad: ु चपि तदैः aeMaaysy साFASM य गो ace वतनeatlet नान olनBESSA ह ने हनिeAतIa: भः Bruhmana Bruhmana Ahara Ahara —– nourishing nourishing eatables eatables such such as as Shashtika Shashtika Shali Shali —– rice rice that that mature mature in in 60 60 days days Godhuma Godhuma —– wheat wheat Mudga Mudga – — green green gram gram Mamsa Mamsa —– meat meat Ghrita Ghrita —– ghee ghee Medicine Medicine with with Hrudya Hrudya (cardiac (cardiac tonic) tonic) and and Deepana Deepana (digestive, (digestive, carminative) carminative) qualities qualities should should be be mixed mixed with with food food and and taken. taken. Abhyanga Abhyanga – — oil oil massage massage Udvartana Udvartana – — powder powder massage massage Snana herbal bath Snana – — herbal bath Niruha Niruha Basti Basti –enema —-enema treatment treatment Snehabasti Snehabasti – — oil oil // ghee ghee enema enema treatment treatment All All these these help help to to restore restore health health of of the the debilitated. debilitated. तथा HFस AHA लभते शम सवपावक Teas पाटवमGaviieca वैम यं quar वष दै यमायष ् धीवणि य ded aa WH BATH ु ः ृ तां detaras: By By these these measures, measures, one one could could gain gain health, health, happiness, happiness, good good intelligence, intelligence, clarity clarity of of vision, vision, strong strong sense sense organs, organs, intelligence, intelligence, sexual sexual vigour vigour and and longevity. longevity. आग तुज रोगा: SMAegot Wal: – — Traumatic Traumatic diseases diseases // caused caused by by external external factors factors X भ sxofavacatsrercassaie aera: ये त वषवा वि न तभ < गा दसं भवाः Nू राग वेषमया या च ATते WareayvAaeaT युराग तवो गदाः Raecaa ser: Those Those disease disease produced produced by by bhuta bhuta (evil (evil spirits, spirits, bacteria, bacteria, parasites, parasites, insects insects and and such such microbes), microbes), Page Page No. No. 44 44 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan visha visha (poisons) (poisons) air air (hurricane, (hurricane, cyclone), cyclone), agni agni (fire, (fire, electricity, electricity, radiation radiation etc) etc) kshata kshata (injury, (injury, wounds wounds etc), etc), bhanga bhanga (fracture (fracture of of bones) bones) etc., etc., as as also also those those due due to to raga raga (desire, (desire, lust), lust), dvesa dvesa (hatred), (hatred), bhaya bhaya (fear) (fear) etc. etc. are are all all know know as as Agantu Agantu diseases diseases arising arising from from external external causes) causes) Sarvaroga Sarvaroga samanya samanya cikitsacikitsa- (general (general treatment treatment for for all all diseases):diseases):- CIT: यागः TARTAR ापराधाना मि aA: योपशमः Tala: म ृ तः देCMHC शकाला म AA व ानं स Tedeaea LATTA 32 ु त यान ुवतनम ् ३२ अथव व हता शाि seafafear ented:तः तकूल हाचनम ् victaorrerdete भ नद ट च प थ थ aera Gah JUh 33 ूता य पश ffeveea ृ क् प ृ क् ३३ अन समासेन fafers: व धरे षः yell: द शतः HeacIeas ु प तयै Baa नजाग त च शा तये ३४ faATe TAPROOT AcIee May 3y ु वकाराणा म ु प नानां DT Avoidance Avoidance of of improper improper activities activities of of body, body, mind mind and and speech speech by by willful willful transgression transgression of of rules, rules, Control Control of of the the senses, senses, remembering remembering previous previous experiences experiences and and acting acting rightly, rightly, good good knowledge knowledge of of the the habitat, habitat, season season and and the the self, self, adherence adherence to to rules rules of of good good conduct conduct and and rituals rituals Peaceful Peaceful procedures procedures as as mentioned mentioned in in Atharva Atharva Veda, Veda, Worship Worship of of celestial celestial powers powers —– Grahashanti Grahashanti (astronomical (astronomical palliative palliative procedures) procedures) Staying Staying away away from from Bhuta Bhuta (evil (evil spirits, spirits, microbes) microbes) Respective Respective treatment treatment followed followed as as per per the the principles principles explained explained above, above, are are the the general general guidelines guidelines to to treat treat all all types types of of diseases. diseases. शोधन Met समय WAT – — Time Time for for Panchakarma Panchakarma treatment treatment शीतो दोषचयं tdierdवं asad वस तेfaery वशोधयन ् aferst ी मजं srarprer अ काले daed घना ययेaaa वा षकमाशु स यक् ocelfc ा नो त tenet रोगान ् Adstest ऋतज जात35 Tae sea ु ा न Gd ु ३५ The The accumulated accumulated Doshas Doshas arising arising from from winter winter should should be be expelled expelled during during Vasanta Vasanta (spring) (spring) That That arising arising from from Summer Summer (Greeshma) (Greeshma) should should be be expelled expelled during during Abhrakala Abhrakala —– Varsha Varsha Ritu Ritu —– rainy rainy season. season. That That arising arising from from rainy rainy season season should should be be expelled expelled during during Ghnatyaya Ghnatyaya (Sharad (Sharad – — Autumn Autumn season) season) By By this, this, people people will will not not become become victims victims of of diseases diseases born born by by the the effect effect of of the the seasons. seasons. Page Page No. No. 45 45 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan अरो य @dq: हे तव: –— Secret ane Secret of of good good health health न यं Rarentaenadl हताहार वहारसेवी waiesent समी यकार fasasaqaca: वषये वस तः fact दाता समः स यपरः ale GA: GU: मावाना तोपसे यरोगः TATA a वी aTच भव sacar: He He ,, who who indulges indulges daily daily in in healthy healthy foods foods and and activities, activities, who who discriminates discriminates the the good good and and bad bad of of everything everything and and then then acts acts wisely, wisely, who who is is not not attached attached too too much much to to the the objects objects of of the the senses, senses, who who develops develops the the habit habit of of charity, charity, of of considering considering all all as as equal, equal, of of truthfulness, truthfulness, of of pardoning pardoning and and keeping keeping company company of of good good persons persons only, only, becomes becomes free free from from all all diseases. diseases. Thus Thus ends ends the the chapter chapter called called Roganutpadaniya, Roganutpadaniya, the the fourth fourth in in Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Astangahrdaya Astangahrdaya samhita samhita of of srimad srimad Vagdhata Vagdhata son son of of Sri Sri Vaidyapati Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Simhagupta. Page Page No. No. 46 46 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter व ानीय Drinkables Chapter 5 5 Drava Drava Vigyaniya Vigyaniya zaव fareta Drinkables The The 5th 5th chapter chapter of of Sutrasthana Sutrasthana is is known known as as Dravadravya Dravadravya Vijnaneeya Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. Adhyaya. It It deals deals with with types types and and health health benefits benefits of of all all the the liquid liquid foods. foods. It It details details types types and and benefits benefits of of water, water, milks, milks, dairy dairy products, juices, honey, products, sugarcane sugarcane juices, honey, oils, oils, wines wines and and urine. urine. Toya –(group of Toya varga varga —(group of waters) waters) Gangambu benefits of Gangambu – — benefits of drinking drinking rain rain water water जीवनं तपणं दयं लाद बु बोधनम ् तन अ य तरसं ASE म ृ टं शीतं अमत ay ु HUE eit लघ TY ु sy ृ ोपमम ् १8 ग गा बु नभसो प ृ टं तFT ु HheGHed: अक दम SMEG TTA ASEटं CYS ु ा तैः हता हत वे agar त य शकालावपे ते 2२ featsacd cernreratard ू ो दे Rain Rain water water is is which which has has come come into into contact contact with with Sunlight, Sunlight, Moon Moon light light and and wind wind is is Jeevaneeya Jeevaneeya —– Enlivening, Enlivening, improves improves quality quality of of life life Tarpana Tarpana – — satiating satiating Hrudya Hrudya – — good good for for heart heart Hladi Hladi —– calming calming and and soothing soothing to to the the mind mind and and stomach stomach Buddhi Stimulates intellect Buddhi praboodhanam praboodhanam —–Stimulates intellect Tanu Tanu – — thin thin Avyaktarasa Avyaktarasa —– imperceptible imperceptible taste taste Sheeta Sheeta —– cold cold Laghu Laghu (light (light to to digest) digest) Amrutopama Amrutopama —– similar similar to to nectar nectar Whether Whether rain rain water water is is good good or or bad bad depends depends on on the the season season and and place place where where it it rains. rains. Notes Notes —– The The properties properties described described above above are are of of rain rain water water collected collected in in aa clean clean vessel vessel directly, directly, aa little little while while after after the the commencement commencement of of rain. rain. It It should should be be consumed consumed within within aa few few hours hours as as it it loses loses its its properties. properties. With With the the increasing increasing industrialization industrialization and and pollution, pollution, the the rain rain water water has has lost lost its its qualities qualities nowadays. nowadays. Hence, Hence, may may not not be be good good to to consume. consume. Test Test for for quality: quality: ये ना भव ृ टममलं Medes शा य नं UWtd राजते िPad थतम ् AAAs अि ल नम ववण aच acta त पेयं aS गा गम ् aitteaataat Only Only that that rain rain water water which which makes makes the the boiled boiled rice rice kept kept in in aa clean clean silver silver plate plate neither neither too too moist moist nor nor change change its its color color is is to to considered considered as as good good for for drinking. drinking. 22 ½ % Page Page No. No. 47 47 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Samudramdu Samudramdu (seawater (seawater qualities) qualities) ::अ यथा सामु ं, त न पात यं मासादा वयुजा वना Seawater Seawater should should not not be be used used for for drinking drinking expect expect during during Ashvayuja Ashvayuja month. month. (September. (September. October/autumn October/autumn season). season). 3 3 Notes:Notes:- During During Ashvayuja Ashvayuja month month there there will will be be the the appearance appearance of of Agastya Agastya nakshatra nakshatra (the (the star star Canopus) Canopus) which which is is said said to to remove remove the the poisonous poisonous properties properties of of water water and and other other things things of of the the earth, earth, hence hence permission permission to to use use other other kinds kinds of of water water for for drinking drinking during during this this month. month. ए म बु GAAatest सुपा थम वप नं Het सदा Td पबे त ् weArg तदभावे च भू म ठमा त र ानुका र यत AaaTd UT PASAARAMTHI Te ् श दे शे shod अकपवनाहतम araqeaaaedd edy ् ु चप ृ व सत वे ते eel Rain Rain water, water, collected collected in in clean clean vessel vessel and and which which has has not not changed changed in in color color taste taste and and odor, odor, should should be be used used for for drinking drinking always. always. In In its its absence, absence, the the water water of of the the earth, earth, which which resembles resembles rainwater rainwater in in all all its its qualities, qualities, collected collected from from clean clean vast vast place place that that has has black black or or white white soil, soil, which which is is exposed exposed to to sunlight sunlight and and breeze. breeze. Dushtajala Dushtajala – — (contaminated (contaminated water) water) न प कशैवालत ण त a पबे acasHtarer quran ृ पणा वला तyaa ृ म् स ग2S ु GarqraanescHAGse Ut TS ुय दप ु वना टम भवCe ृ टं घनं 2S फ े नलं seqacdtd ज तम द त ा य तशै यतः thet ु त तं arcdaeatatkead: अनातवं यमातवं WIA थमं चDT यत sede च UT य URcsAldd Ia ् ल“ ूता दत “ ‘>त ु व म“ ू वषसं g लेषदi ू षतमx ् Water Water which which is is dirty, dirty, mixed mixed with with mud, mud, algae, algae, weeds weeds and and leaves, leaves, which which is is not not exposed exposed to to sunlight sunlight and and wind, wind, which which is is aa mixture mixture of of old old and and fresh, fresh, which which is is thick, thick, not not easily easily digestible, digestible, frothy, frothy, containing containing worms, worms, hot hot (by (by nature), nature), causes causes tingling tingling of of teeth teeth by by being being very very cold, cold, that that rain rain water water which which is is un-seasonal un-seasonal or or though though seasonal seasonal that that of of the the first first rain rain (before (before the the appearance appearance of of Agastya Agastya Nakshatra, Nakshatra, that that contaminated contaminated with with the the webs, webs, saliva, saliva, urine, urine, faeces faeces of of spider spider etc., etc., and and such such other other poisonous poisonous materials, materials, should should not not be be used used for for drinking. drinking. 6-7 6-7 ½ 2 Nadijala Nadijala –(river —(river water water benefits) benefits) पि चमोद धगाः शी वहा या चामलोदकाः afgaateferan: eiraer Bearer: प याः PARA समासा ता न वपर ता वतो अ यथा Gea: Acaया faattarecdea Heae4 Water Water of of the the rivers rivers which which flow flow into into the the western western ocean ocean (Arabian (Arabian sea), sea), which which are are sweet sweet and and which which have have pure pure water water (uncontaminated) (uncontaminated) is is good good for for health, health, where where as as that that flowing flowing into into eastern eastern ocean ocean is is not not ideal ideal for for consumption. consumption. 8 8 Page Page No. No. 48 48 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan sree Uradiaan: उपला फालनाaad: ेप व छे दैः खे दतोदकाः हमव मलयो त ाः प या ता एव ि थराः eAarAA KAT: GAEA Va Tच ARENT: ू क ् कुवते PAaeiieecHvonrnenwarel ृ म ल पद क ठ शरोरोगान THI The The water water of of rivers rivers arising arising from from Himalaya Himalaya and and Malaya Malaya mountains, mountains, and and which which get get churned churned up up well well by by dashing dashing against against rocks rocks are are good good for for health, health, whereas whereas the the same same water water if if gets gets stagnated stagnated (and (and gets gets contaminated) contaminated) gives gives rise rise to to worms worms (intestinal (intestinal parasites), parasites), filariasis, filariasis, diseases diseases of of the the heart, heart, throat throat and and head. head. 9-10 9-10 ा या यपरा तो था द न WMATA Satariet, Hea:जाः ु ामा न, महे SORVANATASHTA, HEAASCA Yat:ुनः उदर ल पदात कान ्, स या व यो AT: वाः प क रया जा Proms, Wea:यः पा WAST ु ठपा डु शरोरोगान ्, दोष बल यका र यः, सागरा भि दोषकृत ् got पौ UhevaaiRve:, aeneeeaaypt Water Water of of rivers rivers of of the the Prachya Prachya (gauda), (gauda), Avanti Avanti (malwa) (malwa) Aparanta Aparanta (konkana) (konkana) countries countries causes causes hemorrhoids. hemorrhoids. Water Water of of rivers rivers arising arising from from Mahendra Mahendra mountains mountains cause cause enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen abdomen and and filariasis; filariasis; those those arising arising from from Sahya Sahya and and Vindhya Vindhya mountains mountains causes causes leprosy leprosy (and (and other other skin skin disease) disease) anaemia anaemia and and diseases diseases of of the the head; head; of of those those arising arising from from Pariyatra, Pariyatra, mitigate mitigate the the (aggravated) (aggravated) dosas, dosas, bestow bestow strength strength and and sexual sexual vigour, vigour, the the water water of of the the sea sea causes causes vitiation vitiation of of all all the the three three dosas. dosas. 11-12. 11-12. Notes:Notes:- Pracya Pracya or or Gauda Gauda desa desa comprises comprises of of central central Bengal Bengal and and parts parts of of Orissa Orissa Avanti Avanti or or Malwa Malwa country country was was round round about about the the modern modern city city of of Ujjain. Ujjain. Aparanta Aparanta or or konkana konkana comprises comprises of of Goa, Goa, karwr karwr and and north north kanara kanara districts districts of of Karnataka. Karnataka. Mahendra Mahendra mountain mountain is is the the northern northern part part of of the the eastern eastern gaths, gaths, (the (the whole whole range range of of hills hills extending extending from from Orissa Orissa to to the the district district of of Madura Madura was was known known by by the the western western Ghats. Ghats. Vindhyas Vindhyas are are mountain mountain ranges ranges of of central central India. India. Prriyatra Prriyatra is is the the western western part part of of the the Vindhya Vindhya mountains. mountains. व या कूपतडाकाद जा गलान faCUIcHI ASH न ् STS MeL: ूपशैलतः The The water water of of kupa kupa (deep (deep well), well), tadaga tadaga (artificial (artificial pond) pond) etc., etc., should should be be considered considered to to be be similar similar (in (in qualities qualities and and properties) properties) to to those those of of the the desert, desert, marshy marshy and and mountains mountains (respectively). (respectively). 12 12 ½ '4 Jalapana Jalapana varjavarja- (avoiding (avoiding of of drinking drinking water) water) ना यमश या वा व पम पाि नगिु eA: म भः argबु पेVAM aT FaeuAeUisera TIO ATS MAATy: पा SERT डूदराIAAT तसाराश TVA हणीशोषशो थ भः ऋते नदाघा यां arceaeat पबे व थो अ पशः A शरि efectcreansat sfप चा aTeser: Water Water should should not not be be consumed consumed or or consumed consumed in in very very little little quantity, quantity, by by those those suffering suffering from from poor poor digestive digestive function, function, tumors tumors of of the the abdomen, abdomen, anaemia, anaemia, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen, abdomen, diarrhoea, diarrhoea, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, diseases diseases of of the the duodenum, duodenum, dropsy. dropsy. Excepting Excepting for for Sharad Sharad (autumn) (autumn) and and Nidagha Nidagha (summer) (summer) even even healthy healthy persons persons should should drink drink less less quantity quantity of of water water in in all all other other seasons seasons 13-14 13-14 Page Page No. No. 49 49 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Jalapana Jalapana phalaphala- (effects (effects of of drinking drinking water water with with respect respect to to meals) meals) सम थल त थमा TACTAPM TETACA ATESबTT: ू कृशा भ ु तम या AAA ुपाः Drinking Drinking water water in in between between meals meals —– healthy healthy habit habit Drinking Drinking water water after after meals meals – — causes causes obesity obesity Drinking Drinking water water before before meals meals —– causes causes emaciation, emaciation, weakness weakness Sheetajala Sheetajala (cold (cold water) water) शीतं मदा यय म मान Alt Aa aCe AAT ला A नमू छा छ द TATA CT ् त ृ णो णदाह tcaraasvars प ता वषा य बु felqeaid नय छ त १५ Tess %s Cold Cold water water relieves relieves Madatyaya alcoholic intoxication, Madatyaya – — alcoholic intoxication, Glani Glani—– exhaustion, exhaustion, Murcha fainting, Murcha – — fainting, Chardi Chardi —– vomiting, vomiting, Shrama Shrama —– debility debility (fatigue), (fatigue), Bhrama dizziness, giddiness, Bhrama —–dizziness, giddiness, Trushna thirst, Trushna – — thirst, Ushna heat (of Ushna —–heat (of the the sun) sun) burning burning sensation, sensation, Pittasra Pittasra —– bleeding bleeding conditions conditions and and Pitta Pitta dominant dominant conditions conditions and and Visha Visha – — poison.15 poison.15 Ushnajala-hot Ushnajala-hot water water drinking drinking benefits benefits द पनं पाचनं तशोधनम ् १६ Qoat Weer क HUSTयं लघ AYSOT TAMIL ve ू णं बि हLAAT मा मानाeae: नल ले मस यः श UMferasay ु नव वरे कासामपीनस वासपा वSAT ु च यते १७ HAMAR T श AEA Po Hot Hot water water Deepana stimulates hunger, Deepana —–stimulates hunger, Pachana helps digestion, Pachana – — helps digestion, Kantya Kantya —– good good for for the the throat, throat, Laghu easily to Laghu —–easily to digest, digest, Basti cleanses the Basti shodhana shodhana – — cleanses the urinary urinary bladder, bladder, Relieves Relieves Hidhma relives hiccup, Hidhma —–relives hiccup, Adhmana flatulence, Adhmana – — flatulence, Anila Anila —– aggravation aggravation of of Vata Vata Shleshma Shleshma —– aggravation aggravation of of Kapha Kapha It It is is ideal ideal on on the the days days of of Panchakarma Panchakarma therapy therapy Navajvara Navajvara – — fever fever of of recent recent origin origin Kasa Kasa – — cold, cold, cough cough Page Page No. No. 50 50 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Ama Ama – — accumulation accumulation of of undigested undigested materials, materials, Peenasa Peenasa —– rhinitis rhinitis (running (running nose), nose), Shwasa Shwasa – — dyspnoea dyspnoea and and Parshvaruja Parshvaruja – — pain pain in in the the flanks. flanks. 16-17 16-17 अन भ यि द TY लघु Tच तोयं वाथे तशीतलम ् seAAeg As Fateh प तयु ते Sd हतं ate, दोषे , cats यु षतं atratyenet त दोषकृत ् १८ caged ec Water Water which which is is boiled boiled and and then then cooled cooled Anabhishyandi Anabhishyandi —– does does not not increase increase moisture moisture or or stickiness stickiness in in the the body body Laghu light to Laghu —–light to digest digest Useful Useful in in Pitta Pitta conditions. conditions. Water Water which which is is kept kept overnight, overnight, is is not not ideal ideal for for consumption. consumption. It It increases increases Tridosha. Tridosha. 18. 18. NarikelodakaNarikelodaka- (coconut (coconut water water benefits):benefits):ना रकेलोदकं ि न धं वाद ु व ृ यं हमं लघु त द पनं Tata बि तशोधनम ् १९ Tonicateraet °s ृ णा प ता नलहरं ate Tender Tender coconut coconut water water is is Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous, unctuous, oily oily Swadu Swadu – — sweet, sweet, Vrushya Vrushya – — aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, Hima Hima —– coolant, coolant, Laghu easy to Laghu —–easy to digest digest Relieves Relieves Trushna thirst, Trushna – — thirst, Pittanila Pittanila hara hara – — balances balances Pitta Pitta and and Vata. Vata. Deepana increases hunger Deepana —–increases hunger and and Bastishodhana Bastishodhana – — cleanses cleanses urinary urinary bladder.19 bladder.19 वषासfecaerea परं at तोये aay वरावरे asty ु द यनादे ये aX इ त ae तोय ast: वगः Sit During During varsa varsa (rainy (rainy season) season) rain rain water water is is best best and and river river water water least least suitable suitable for for consumption. consumption. 19 19 ½ Y Page Page No. No. 51 51 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Ksheera –(group of Ksheera varga varga —(group of milk milk and and milk milk products) products) अथ atract: ीरवगः we वादप न धमोज यं eTfatler धातव FAGUALe A ् २० 20 ु ाकरसं िSasTATSACA ु धनम वात प तहरं FA व ृ यं VeoAe ले मलं TS गु शीतलम AACA efter ् ाय: Wa: पय: wea: Generally Generally milk milk is is Svadupakarasa Svadupakarasa – — sweet sweet in in taste taste and and also also at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous, unctuous, Ojovardhana Ojovardhana – — increases increases Ojus, Ojus, Dhatuvardhana Dhatuvardhana – — nourishes nourishes and and increases increases body body tissues, tissues, Vata Vata Pittahara Pittahara —– mitigates mitigates Vata Vata and and Pitta, Pitta, Vrushya Vrushya —– aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, Shleshmala Shleshmala – — increases increases kapha kapha Guru Guru – — heavy heavy to to digest digest Sheetala Sheetala – — coolant. coolant. 20-21 20-21 Goksheera Goksheera –(cow —(cow milk milk benefits):benefits):अ ग यं तु जीवनीयं रसायनम ् त ीण हतं ACS मे यं ब त यकरं सरम sraahored Todयं Fast WA ् म ममदाल मी वासकासा STATA AC ARMA HAT दतCATT: ृ ुधः जीन मू कृ ं Cedited र त प तं च Heistवरं Apes FT नाशये aeraत ् Cow’s Cow’s milk milk Jeevaneeya Jeevaneeya —– promotes promotes long long life, life, Rasayana anti aging, Rasayana —–anti aging, rejuvenating rejuvenating Kshataksheena Kshataksheena hita hita —– good good for for those those emaciated emaciated after after chest chest injury injury Medhya increases intelligence, Medhya —–increases intelligence, Balya Balya – — strengthening strengthening Stanyakara Stanyakara —– promotes promotes breast breast milk milk production production Sara Sara —– helps helps easy easy movement movement of of the the bowels bowels Relieves Relieves Shramahara Shramahara – — exhaustion, exhaustion, Bhramahara Bhramahara – — dizziness dizziness Mada toxicity, Mada – — toxicity, Alakshmi Alakshmi -- in-auspiciousness in-auspiciousness Shwasa Shwasa – — dyspnoea, dyspnoea, Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, Atitrut Atitrut Kshudha Kshudha – — severe severe thirst thirst and and hunger, hunger, Jeernajvara Jeernajvara —– chronic chronic fevers, fevers, Mutrakrichra Mutrakrichra – — dysurea dysurea Raktapitta Raktapitta -- bleeding bleeding diseases diseases 21 21 1/2 1/2 Page Page No. No. 52 52 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Mahisha Mahisha ksheera ksheera – — (buffalo (buffalo milk milk benefits) benefits) हतं Heater अ यि न afergeat अ न े यो atrar गर यो ares मा हषं a हमम ् Il॥ २३ fea 23 ॥Il Buffalo Buffalo milk milk is is good good for for people people with with very very good good digestion digestion power, power, who who suffer suffer from from Anidra Anidra —– insomnia. insomnia. It It is is aa coolant. coolant. 23 23 Aja Aja ksheera-(Goat ksheera-(Goat milk milk benefits):benefits):अ पा बप HOUFGUACH ATA कट HefarAlet: AT ु ु ान यायाम ु त ताशनैः लघ आजं वर aT वासर त तसारिजत Bet शोष WMG SAL aA पcaताfea Patel ् २४ WY Goat Goat drinks drinks less less water water and and does does aa lot lot of of walking. walking. It It eats eats pungent pungent and and bitter bitter grass grass and and vegetables vegetables that that are are light light to to digest. digest. Hence Hence goat goat milk milk also also carries carries these these qualities. qualities. Goat Goat milk milk is is useful useful in in Shosha Shosha —– emaciation emaciation Jvara Jvara – — fever fever Shwasa Shwasa – — dyspnoea, dyspnoea, asthma, asthma, chronic chronic bronchial bronchial disorders disorders Raktapitta Raktapitta —– bleeding bleeding disorders disorders of of Pitta Pitta origin origin such such as as haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, nasal nasal bleeding bleeding Atisara Atisara —– diarrhoea, diarrhoea, dysentery. dysentery. 24 24 Ustra Ustra ksheera ksheera (camel (camel milk milk benefits) benefits) —– इष ू ो SUTAAUTA णलवणमौ Echकं द पनं लघ SIAN at AT ु श वातकफानाहक MEdतं ATH BASHAM HATA ् २५ 2S ृ मशोफोदराशसाम Ushtra Ushtra ksheera ksheera (milk (milk of of camel)camel)- is is Ishat slightly dry Ishat ruksha ruksha —–slightly dry ushna ushna —– hot hot Lavana salty taste Lavana — –salty taste Deepana increases digestion Deepana —–increases digestion strength strength Laghu easy to Laghu —–easy to digest digest Vatakaphaan useful in Vatakaphaan shastam shastam – — useful in Vata Vata and and Kapha Kapha Krumi relieves worm Krumi —–relieves worm infestation infestation Shopha anti inflammatory Shopha – — anti inflammatory Udara Udara —– useful useful in in ascites ascites Arshas Arshas – — haemorrhoids. haemorrhoids. 25 25 Page Page No. No. 53 53 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Manusha Manusha ksheera ksheera —– (breast (breast milk milk benefits):benefits):मान वात प ayaa तस ग रोगिजत ् ALYYुषं aa Aas ृ भघाता तपणा चोतनैन यैः areata: Breast Breast milk milk is is useful useful in in Vata Vata and and Pitta Pitta imbalance imbalance disorders disorders Asruk Asruk —– blood blood vitiation vitiation disorder disorder Abhighata Abhighata —– useful useful in in injuries injuries Akshirooga Akshirooga — –itit is is used used as as eye eye drops drops to to relieve relieve eye eye infections infections and and to to relieve relieve redness. redness. It It is is used used in in Tarpana Tarpana and and Ashchottana Ashchottana types types of of eye eye treatments. treatments. It It is is also also used used as as nasal nasal drops. drops. 26. 26. Avika Avika ksheera ksheera – — (ewe’s (ewe’s milk):milk):अ MEGAयं त FATAHA ृ णमा वकम ् २६ वात या धहरं feeaearateranreg ह मा वास प तकफ दम ् aaeatiet Eve’s Eve’s milk milk is is not not good good for for heart, heart, hot hot in in nature, nature, useful useful in in Vata Vata disorders, disorders, gives gives rise rise to to hiccup, hiccup, respiratory respiratory conditions. conditions. It It increases increases Pitta Pitta and and Kapha. Kapha. 26 26 ½ 4 Hastiksheera त याः ated थैय कृत ् It Hastiksheera (Elephant (Elephant milk milk benefits) benefits) -- हि @ Sclea: It is is strengthening strengthening in in nature. nature. Ekashapha Ekashapha ksheeraksheera- (milk (milk of of single single hoofed hoofed animals):animals):वाढम वै कशफं लघ qTeqT oy ु ु णं cde शाखावातहरं ललवणं ASA जडताकरम MAA सा AFAAIT HA ् Milk Milk of of single single hoofed hoofed animals animals (like (like horse, horse, donkey, donkey, etc) etc) is is very very hot hot (in (in potency), potency), useful useful in in vata vata disorders, disorders, is is slightly slightly sour sour and and salt salt and and causes causes lassitude lassitude (laziness). (laziness). Uncooked Uncooked milk milk is is पयो sfsaieg अ भ यि द WaT, गव यु या श त यथा २८ Gat YaAA HAA 2 ु ामं , GCA ृ मतो अ भवे गर यो अ तश त ृ ं, धारो णमम त ृ ोपमम ् Abhisyandi Abhisyandi (causes (causes excess excess secretion secretion in in the the tissue tissue pores, pores, causing causing their their blockage) blockage) Guru Guru – — heavy heavy to to digest digest Amakara Amakara – — causes causes Ama Ama and and indigestion indigestion Yuktya Yuktya shrutam shrutam amrutopamam amrutopamam -—–ifif it it is is properly properly boiled, boiled, it it is is similar similar to to nectar. nectar. Otherwise, Otherwise, it it is is poison. poison. Dharoshna Dharoshna —– Milk Milk drawn drawn from from udder udder (nipple) (nipple) direct direct in in to to mouth mouth is is similar similar to to nectar. nectar. (Provided (Provided cow cow is is perfectly perfectly healthy healthy without without any any infection) infection) Page Page No. No. 54 54 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Dadhi Dadhi (curds (curds benefits/soured benefits/soured milk/coagulated milk/coagulated milk) milk) अ लपाकरसं IS ा ह THT गु णं aft द ध aad वातिजत 2 HATS ् २९ मेदः श नशोफकृत ् AE: Usmsaverenicaea ster ु बल ले म प तर ताि रो च णु श तम चौ etc शीतके fayetsat वषम वरे 30 ३० Ufasyy eect पीनसे म क े च, ं त हणीगदे Gers AaHes a, wat FT ु aectrae ू ृ नै वा याि न श atasot नैवो णं THe वस ASOT तो ण शर aqTeaeaaiy NCHसु aन 3k३१ नामु गसूपं ना ौ ं त नाघत ृ सतोपलम ् न चानामलकं ना न यं Ul णो AewAeaU म थम यथा 32 ३२ a dea Ayप fact वरासCc िृ प तवीसपक ु ठपा po}डु म दम* ् 2 Curd Curd has has Amla sour taste Amla rasa rasa – — sour taste Amla Amla paka paka – — undergoes undergoes sour sour taste taste conversion conversion after after digestion digestion Grahi Grahi -- absorbent, absorbent, useful useful in in diarrhoea, diarrhoea, Guru Guru – — heavy heavy to to digest digest Ushna hot in Ushna – — hot in nature nature Vatajit Vatajit – — balances balances Vata Vata Increases Increases Meda Meda (fat), (fat), Shukra Shukra (semen), (semen), Bala Bala (strength), (strength), Kapha, Kapha, Raktapitta Raktapitta (bleeding (bleeding disorders), disorders), Agni Agni (digestion (digestion strength) strength) and and shotha shotha (inflammation). (inflammation). Rochishnu Rochishnu – — increases increases taste taste Curd Curd Useful Useful in in aruchau aruchau – — useful useful in in anorexia anorexia Vishamajwara Vishamajwara – — chronic, chronic, recurrent recurrent fever fever Peenasa rhinitis Peenasa – — rhinitis Mutrakruchra Mutrakruchra – — dysuria dysuria Grahani Grahani – — malabsorption malabsorption syndrome syndrome Rules Rules for for curds curds consumption: consumption: Curd Curd should should not not be be eaten eaten at at nights, nights, not not made made hot, hot, Curd Curd should should not not be be taken taken along along with with green green gram gram soup soup It It should should not not be be taken taken along along with with honey, honey, ghee, ghee, sugar sugar and and Amla. Amla. It It should should not not be be taken taken daily. daily. If If used used daily, daily, it it may may cause cause // worsen worsen fever, fever, bleeding bleeding disorders, disorders, skin skin diseases, diseases, anemia anemia and and dizziness. dizziness. 29-32 29-32 Takra Takra –(Fat-less —(Fat-less buttermilk):butter milk):त पनं कफवातिजत ah ं लघ AY ु कषाया HAF लं दAer Hthalafsiel ् ३३ 33 शोफोदराश हणीदोषम QNeHIaNTitaevie THATS a: ू हा चः ल हग3 ु मघCc AeA त गरपा SAT वामयान CollealeHe AAT oT~ ् जये Saत~ ् ३४ 3y ृ याप ~IAT s Page Page No. No. 55 55 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Takra Takra (butter (butter milk) milk) -- churned churned curds curds Laghu easy to Laghu —–easy to digest digest Kashaya, sour, astringent, Kashaya, amla amla – — sour, astringent, Deepana Deepana —– improves improves digestion digestion strength strength Kaphavatjit Kaphavatjit – — balances balances Kapha Kapha and and Vata Vata Useful Useful in in Shopha Shopha – — inflammatory inflammatory conditions conditions Udara ascites Udara —–ascites Arsha Arsha —– hemorrhoids hemorrhoids Grahani Grahani—– malabsorption malabsorption syndrome syndrome Mutradosha, urine infection, Mutradosha, Mutragraha Mutragraha – — urine infection, dysuria dysuria Aruchi Aruchi – — anorexia anorexia Pleeha Pleeha —– splenomegaly splenomegaly Gulma Gulma —– abdominal abdominal distention distention Ghritavyapat Ghritavyapat – — in in indigestion indigestion caused caused by by excess excess consumption consumption of of ghee ghee Gara Gara visha visha – — chronic chronic intoxication intoxication and and Pandu Pandu —– anemia anemia Mastu Mastu – — Supernatent Supernatent liquid liquid of of curds curds (whey/watery (whey/watery part part of of curds) curds) ::त व म तु सरं acaeAST AX ोत: शो व ट भिजत ् लघ ra: etterध faversifard ag ु ।| Mastu Mastu is is similar similar to to buttermilk. buttermilk. It It is is Sara Sara —– promotes promotes movement movement of of fluids fluids inside inside body body channels channels Srotashodhi Srotashodhi – — cleanses cleanses body body channels channels Vishtambhajit Vishtambhajit – — relieves relieves constipation constipation Laghu easy to Laghu —–easy to digest. digest. Navanita Navanita (Butter):(Butter):नवनीतं वणबलाि नकृत ् ३५ adeld नवं ad वGey elt arsonist 34 ृ यं शीतं स पतास ृ याश teदतकासिजत USMSा ह वाता Taare HAST, ् ीरो वं त स ा ह रtrattearertrtstd त प ता रोगिजत ् ३६ aintad I ु Usate 36 Fresh Fresh Navanita Navanita (butter) (butter) is is Vrushya Vrushya —– aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, Sheeta Sheeta —– coolant coolant Varna, Varna, bala, bala, agnikrut agnikrut – — improves improves skin skin complexion, complexion, strength strength and and digestion digestion strength. strength. Sangrahi Sangrahi —– abosrbent, abosrbent, useful useful in in diarrhoea diarrhoea Vatapittasruk jit –— balances Vatapittasruk jit balances Vata, Vata, Pitta Pitta and and detoxifies detoxifies blood blood Useful Useful in in Kshaya Kshaya – — chronic chronic respiratory respiratory disorders disorders leading leading to to emaciation emaciation Arsha Arsha —– hemorrhoids hemorrhoids Ardita Ardita vata vata – — paralysis paralysis Kasa Kasa – — cough cough Page Page No. No. 56 56 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan The The butter butter made made directly directly from from milk milk is is Sangrahi Sangrahi —– absorbent, absorbent, useful useful in in diarrhoea diarrhoea Raktapittajit Raktapittajit – — useful useful in in bleeding bleeding disorders disorders Akshirogajit Akshirogajit – — useful useful in in eye eye diseases. diseases. 35-36. 35-36. Ghrita Ghrita —– (ghee/clarified (ghee/clarified butter):butter):शeTतं1 धी म7 ृ तमेधाि नबलायT: ःु श ाम ् efreafarenticraone: PsraaT ु च ुषIL बालव MAGEVA Heaतसौक PAACANTAATA 39 ु माय वारा थनाम+ ् ३७ ृ जाकाि Ce 2 ीणपर सपश मनाम ST त ARNOTAL ATA ISAT ाि न TF ल पcaता ce AL ् वातMAA प त वषो KAM मादशोषाल मी वरापहम ् ३८ AA ITASHTSATISA 3¢ नेहानामु तमं शीतं वयसः TAT थापनं परम Sagrada eile GAA: WA ् सह व ध भघतं eadवीय fated Heh ु त ् ३९ 38 ृ कमसह Ghee Ghee is is ideal ideal for for improving improving intelligence; intelligence; memory, memory, ingenuity, ingenuity, digestion digestion strength, strength, long long life, life, semen semen (sexual (sexual vigour), vigour), and and eye eye sight. sight. Ghee Ghee is is good good for for children, children, the the aged, aged, those those who who desire desire more more children, children, tenderness tenderness of of the the body, body, and and pleasant pleasant voice, voice, for for those those suffering suffering from from emaciation emaciation as as aa result result of of injury injury to to chest chest (lungs), (lungs), Parisarpa Parisarpa (herpes), (herpes), injury injury from from weapons, weapons, and and fire, fire, disorders disorders of of Vata Vata and and Pitta Pitta origin, origin, poison, poison, insanity, insanity, inauspicious inauspicious activity activity (witchcraft, (witchcraft, etc.) etc.) and and fevers; fevers; Of all the fatty materials, ghee is Of all the fatty materials, ghee is the the best. best. It It is is coolant, coolant, best best for for retaining retaining of of youth; youth; capable capable of of giving giving aa thousand thousand good good effects effects by by aa thousand thousand kinds kinds ofof processing. processing. 37-39. 37-39. Purana Purana ghrita ghrita —– Old Old ghee ghee मदाप मारमA ू छाय शरः कणा योfer नजान ACMEARACOA: PUTA sTeT L ् प याधीन ् TetaTARITVT, नशोधनरोपणम ् ४० ROT Ta त careitel Yo ुराणं जय Purana Purana Ghrita Ghrita (old (old ghee) ghee) is is used used in in the the treatment treatment of of Mada intoxication, Mada – — intoxication, Apasmara epilepsy, Apasmara —–epilepsy, Murcha fainting, Murcha – — fainting, Shira, diseases of Shira, karna, karna, akshi akshi yoni yoni roga roga —–diseases of the the head, head, ear, ear, eye eye and and vagina; vagina; Old Old ghee ghee cleanses cleanses and and heals heals wounds. wounds. 40. 40. Milk Milk preparations, preparations, fatty fatty dairy dairy products: products: gear: ब याः froretiayariaranuned: कलाटपीयnNष ू कONू चकामोरणादयः श व टि भग2 ु दोषलाः ४१ aspfelarnanr ve ु न ाकफकरा fasetrsrsrectvor: 2S Kilata, Kilata, Piyusa, Piyusa, Kurcika, Kurcika, Morana, Morana, etc. etc. are are strengthening, strengthening, increase increase the the semen, semen, sleep sleep and and Kapha, Kapha, cause cause constipation, constipation, heavy heavy to to digest, digest, and and aggravate aggravate the the Doshas. Doshas. 41. 41. Page Page No. No. 57 57 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Notes Notes -- Kilata Kilata is is the the solid solid portion portion obtained obtained after after heating heating curds curds or or buttermilk, buttermilk, Piyusa Piyusa is is the the milk milk of of cow just given cow which which has has just given birth birth to to aa calf, calf, upto upto aa period period of of about about three three days days or or till till the the milk milk becomes becomes thin; thin; Kurcika Kurcika is is the the solid solid portion portion obtained obtained after after heating heating buttermilk buttermilk while while Morana Morana (or (or Morata) Morata) is is the the sour, sour, thin thin liquid liquid portion. portion. ग ये afrye ीरघत नि दते त आ वस भवेI॥ vee q ु sifearere ृ े 8dे ठे feliead Milk and ghee obtained from cows from ewe’s Milk and ghee obtained from cows milk milk are are best best and and those those obtained obtained from ewe’s milk, milk, the the least. least. 41½. 41%. Iksu juice and Iksu Varga Varga – — (group (group of of sugarcane sugarcane juice and its its products) products) Iksurasa (properties of juice) :Iksurasa Guna Guna —–(properties of sugarcane sugarcane juice) :अथे वगः wey ु act: इ सरोae: गु ः Reteeit ि न धो Feur: बंहृ णः HHA कफमNees sat:ोः GRY v2 ू कृत ् ४२ व प त नः gee: eat अ arated: ृ यः शीतो वादप Targurenceay Ta: ु ाकरसो रसः Juice Juice of of sugar sugar cane cane is is Sara Sara (laxative), (laxative), Guru Guru – — heavy heavy to to digestion digestion Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous unctuous Brihmana nutritive, improves Brihmana —–nutritive, improves weight weight Kaphakrut Kaphakrut – — increases increases Kapha Kapha Mutrakrut Mutrakrut —– increases increases urine urine volume volume Vrushya Vrushya —– aphrodisiac aphrodisiac Sheeta Sheeta —– coolant coolant Asrapittaghna Asrapittaghna – — useful useful in in bleeding bleeding disorders disorders Swadupaka Swadupaka rasa rasa —– sweet. sweet. 42. 42. A अ 31a े सलवणो, Peau, दarathSa: ere: सो तपी डतः शकरासमः म“ ूल ज °Sतद ु धा दपीडना= मलस 2 करात~ ् कि च कालं faycar व ु या च वकृ त ं या faracaret a fapia aaत याि afer:कः वदा ह ग नासौ ु व ट भी ते facie aefasersit cerat The The tip tip of of shoots shoots of of sugarcane sugarcane has has salt salt taste. taste. If If the the roots, roots, shoots shoots and and worm worm infested infested parts parts of of the the cane juice gets cane is is crushed crushed together, together, the the juice gets mixed mixed with with dirty dirty material. material. It It leads leads to to burning burning sensation, sensation, indigestion indigestion and and constipation. constipation. 43-44. 43-44. त पौ aa loge:कः शै य सादमाधुयवर तमनु aie: वां शकः damental The The Poundraka Poundraka variety variety of of cane cane is is best best in in view view of of its its coolant, coolant, effect, effect, thinness thinness and and more more sweetness sweetness of juice; next of its its juice; next to to it it is is the the Vamsika Vamsika variety. variety. 45. 45. Page Page No. No. 58 58 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan शतपवकका तारनै पाला AeA: या ततः MAHA KALAMA मात ् HAT FANT: AHIMAच Bro: स ाराः सकषाया सो णाः fafsaefaaree: कि च वदा हनः Next Next are are the the Sataparvaka, Sataparvaka, Kantara, Kantara, Naipala Naipala etc., etc., in in respective respective order, order, are are slightly slightly Alkaline Alkaline and and astringent astringent in in taste, taste, hot hot in in potency potency and and cause cause burning burning sensation sensation slightly. slightly. 46. 46. Phanita Phanita —– (half (half —– cooked cooked molasses, molasses, unrefined unrefined treacle) treacle) ::फा णतं ग चयकृत ् Aas मू शोधनम ् ।| wird qaaieg ुव भ यि द capa Phanita Phanita (half (half—– cooked cooked molasses) molasses) is is heavy heavy (hard (hard to to digest), digest), Abhisyandi Abhisyandi (increasing (increasing the the secretions secretions in in the the tissues tissues pores pores and and blocking blocking them), them), causes causes mild mild increase increase of of Tridosha Tridosha and and cleanses cleanses the the urine urine (by (by increasing increasing its its quantity). quantity). Guda Guda – — (jaggery/molasses/treacle) (jaggery/molasses/treacle) ::ना त ले मकरो धौतः aaa ett: सYeृ ट म AAHegsS: vo ू शकृ गड ु ः ४७ भूतकृ मम जास ृ मे दोमांस कफो WAPAASASACAH HN अपरः 31TC: Guda Guda (jaggery, (jaggery, molasses), molasses), washed washed well well (made (made white white and and purified)purified)Natishleshma Natishleshma kara kara – — does does not not increase increase Kapha Kapha to to aa large large extent extent Srushtamutrashakrut Srushtamutrashakrut —– increases increases volume volume of of urine urine and and faeces faeces If If it it is is not not prepared prepared properly, properly, it it causes causes intestinal intestinal worms, worms, increases increases chances chances of of Kapha Kapha disorder disorder in in marrow, marrow, blood, blood, fat fat tissue tissue and and muscles. muscles. रु ाणः प य च ,, AA: नवः LeSHTTAT ले माि नसादक Sea:यः पWIT: WALT SHAृ त ् ४८ ve Old jaggery is Old jaggery is good good for for heart, heart, and and should should be be consumed. consumed. Freshly jaggery increases Freshly prepared prepared jaggery increases Kapha Kapha and and causes causes indigestion. indigestion. 47-48. 47-48. Matsyandikadi Matsyandikadi —– (brown (brown sugar sugar etc.):etc.):व ीण त हता tea र त Accor: प ता नलापहाः gear: ृ याः atoretateal म यि डकाख ड सताः HAT मेण ग ण ACMOSHRAaUSAA: FOTACAAT: vs ु व तमाः ४९ Matsyandika Matsyandika (brown (brown sugar), sugar), Khanda Khanda (sugar (sugar candy) candy) and and Sita Sita (white (white crystalline crystalline sugar) sugar) in in their their succeeding succeeding order order are are better.They better. They are are aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, good good for for the the emaciated emaciated and and the the wounded, wounded, useful useful in in bleeding bleeding diseases diseases and and aggravation aggravation of of Vata. Vata. 49. 49. Page Page No. No. 59 59 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Yasa Yasa Sarkara Sarkara ::त गण त तमधुरा PITA कषाया AAA यासशकरा TQM ु ा FASTA Yasa Yasa Sarkara Sarkara (sugar (sugar prepared prepared from from Yavasaka Yavasaka plant) plant) is is similar similar in in properties properties to to sugar sugar but but is is bitterbittersweet sweet and and astringent astringent in in taste. taste. 49½. 491. दाहत ae eraierearalrrcdeea: WAT:राः ृ छ दमू छा ुि प त यः सवशक All All types types of of sugars sugars are are useful useful in in burning burning sensation, sensation, thirst, thirst, vomiting, vomiting, fainting fainting and and bleeding bleeding diseases. diseases. 50. 50. शकरे ु वकाराणां wird फा णतं Tच aay वरावरे | । MLTSHROT Among the products of sugarcane juice, juice, sugar Phanita (half Among the products of sugarcane sugar is is the the best best and and Phanita (half cooked cooked molasses) molasses) is is the the least. least. 50½. 50’. Madhu (honey) :Madhu —–(honey) :च छे द त Aaaु यं Bie Terersalayeeanacdad 4% ृ ले म वष ह मा प तनुत ् ५१ मे हकु ठकृ म छ द वासकासा तसारिजत AppropiacsieaHPranican rad ् णशोधनस धानारोपणं वातलं TIMUAAHMARGT Adet मध AY ु ५२ 42 कषाय मध तु या मध wat ं HVA ALL,ुरं, तaedeal AY ुशकरा Madhu Madhu (honey) (honey) is is Chakshushya Chakshushya – — good good for for the the eyes eyes (vision), (vision), Chedi Chedi —– breaks breaks up up hard hard masses, masses, Trut relieves thirst, Trut —–relieves thirst, Shelshmahara Shelshmahara – — balances balances Kapha Kapha Useful Useful in in Visha Visha – — toxicity toxicity Hidhma Hidhma —– hiccup hiccup Asrapitta Asrapitta – — bleeding bleeding conditions conditions Meha diabetes, urinary Meha —–diabetes, urinary tract tract diseases diseases Kushta Kushta – — skin skin diseases diseases Krumi Krumi—– worm worm infestation infestation Chardi Chardi —– vomiting vomiting Shwasa Shwasa – — dyspnoea, dyspnoea, chronic chronic respiratory respiratory diseases diseases Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, cold cold Atisara Atisara —– diarrhoea diarrhoea Vrana Vrana shodhana shodhana – — cleanses cleanses wounds wounds Vrana Vrana sandhana, sandhana, ropana ropana —– heals heals wound wound quickly quickly Vatala Vatala – — increases increases Vata Vata Ruksha Ruksha – — dry dry Kashaya, astringent and Kashaya, Madhura Madhura – — astringent and sweet sweet Page Page No. No. 60 60 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Crystallized Crystallized honey honey —– Madhu Madhu Sarkara Sarkara is is similar similar to to honey honey in in properties. properties. 51-52½. 51-521. SUOMI F Fed 93 ॥Il उ णमु णारमु णे स यु तं aeotetgied चो णै नहि त act तत il ् ॥ ५३ Honey, Honey, kills, kills, if if used used after after heating heating it, it, and and by by those those suffering suffering from from great great heat, heat, used used during during hot hot season, season, hot hot country country or or with with hot hot foods. foods. 53. 53. छदनेfree न हे चUT मध नवायते Wedd Ayo a frac ू णं न अल धपाकमा वे व AIAestadad तयोय माि नवतते ५४ sorsegpaedad sy schragart: इती ुव गः But But honey honey does does not not cause cause any any harm harm when when used used warm warm for for producing producing vomiting vomiting or or for for administration administration of of Niruha Niruha (decoction (decoction enema) enema) because because it it comes comes out out of of the the body body before before it it undergoes undergoes digestion. digestion. 54. 54. Taila Taila Varga Varga – — (group (group of of oils oils and and other other fats) fats) ::तैलं elisa वयो नवत aa मु यं cHeor ती णं caaia यवा य a7च dea ् त Aes व दोष त ् HoTISA अजच ु यं स कफकृ न च CHAE YEAST T ५५ 44 ू मो णं Hthhest क बंहृ णायालं CYT थूलानां HAT कशनाय Tच PUA ृ शानां FSA ब व कं pied कृ म नं च सं कारात Aas geldch o UHRA Ee ् सवरोगिजत ् ५६ Oils Oils are are generally generally similar similar to to their their source source (oil (oil seed). seed). Sesame Sesame oil oil is is the the most most important important among among all all oils. oils. Sesame Sesame oil oil is is Tvak Tvak doshanut doshanut – — cleanses cleanses and and detoxifies detoxifies skin skin Chakshushya Chakshushya – — good good for for eyes eyes Sukshma pierces into Sukshma —–pierces into deep deep tissues tissues Ushna hot, balances Ushna —–hot, balances Kapha Kapha useful useful for for both both obese obese and and emaciated emaciated people. people. Useful Useful to to relieve relieve constipation constipation and and worm worm infestation. infestation. When When it it is is processed processed with with other other herbs, herbs, it it is is very very beneficial beneficial in in various various diseases. diseases. Oil Oil of of Eranda Eranda —– (Castor (Castor oil oil benefits) benefits) ::स त तो णमैर डं तैलं वाद ु सरं ग ु वATCA मगु मा नलकफान वषम वरम ् ५७ APH CLुदरं MATHS Slo शोफौ च गु यको ठप ृ ठा यौ जये vent a कट Hceaaisoysorrat aLत ् ती णो णं feat पि छलं Tau, व ं , tecusiada र तैर डो वं व cafe व त ५८ cevisor se Page Page No. No. 61 61 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Castor Castor oil oil is is bitter, bitter, pungent pungent and and sweet sweet in in taste, taste, Sara Sara —– promotes promotes natural natural movement movement of of body body fluids fluids (laxative), (laxative), Guru Guru – — hard hard to to digest, digest, Useful Useful in in Vardhma Vardhma -- enlargement enlargement of of the the scrotum scrotum (hernia), (hernia), Gulma Gulma —– abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, Anila Anila kaphahara kaphahara —– diseases diseases caused caused by by Vata Vata and and Kapha, Kapha, Udara ascites Udara —–ascites Vishama jwara –— intermittent Vishama jwara intermittent fevers, fevers, pain pain and and swellings swellings of of the the waist, waist, genitals, genitals, abdomen abdomen and and back, back, is is capable capable of of penetrating penetrating deep, deep, hot hot in in potency potency and and bad bad in in smell. smell. Oil Oil of of red red variety variety of of castor castor seeds seeds is is still still more more penetrating, penetrating, hot hot in in potency potency and and sticky sticky and and has has aa bad bad smell. smell. 57 57 -- 58. 58. Notes Notes ::- Castor Castor oil oil is is used used for for medicinal medicinal purpose purpose to to produce produce purgation purgation to to relieve relieve pains pains and and reduce reduce swelling swelling etc. etc. it it is is an an efficient efficient Vatahara Vatahara drug drug (mitigates (mitigates the the increased increased Vata) Vata) and and so so very very useful useful in in many many diseases. diseases. Sarshapa Sarshapa Taila Taila —– (mustard (mustard oil oil benefits) benefits) :: कट HOT AIT ती Hevrणं कफश Hweshifera\ tery ् ू णं साषपं ु ा नलापहम ay ु Pccaepd Hloavaritavrstedistd 48 लघ प ता कृत ् कोठक ु ठाश णज तिु जत ् ५९ Sarsapa Sarsapa Taila Taila —– (mustard (mustard oil) oil) is is pungent, pungent, hot hot in in potency, potency, penetrating penetrating deep, deep, mitigates mitigates (reduces) (reduces) Kapha, Kapha, semen semen and and Anila Anila (Vata), (Vata), easy easy to to digest, digest, causes causes bleeding bleeding diseases, diseases, rashes rashes on on the the skin, skin, skin skin diseases, diseases, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, ulcers, ulcers, and and worms worms (bacteria (bacteria etc). etc). Aksha (oil of Aksha Taila Taila —–(oil of Vibhitaka) Vibhitaka) ::आ वाद ु BA हमं क े यं ग प ता नलापहम ् ।| et ं Fag Hea awु ears Aksa Aksa Taila Taila —– oil oil obtained obtained from from seeds seeds of of Vibhitaka Vibhitaka is is sweet, sweet, cold cold in in potency potency good good for for the the hair, hair, hard hard to to digest, digest, mitigates mitigates Pitta Pitta and and Vata. Vata. Nimbi Nimbi Taila Taila —– (Neem (Neem oil) oil) ::- ना यु AG णं fersat न बजं frat त तं PiApPronHyryd कृ मकु ठकफ णत eI ॥ ु ् Il॥ ६० Neem Neem oil oil – — isis not not very very hot hot (slightly (slightly hot) hot) in in potency, potency, bitter, bitter, anti anti microbial, microbial, useful useful in in skin skin diseases diseases and and mitigates mitigates Kapha. Kapha. 60. 60. Page Page No. No. 62 62 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Uma-Kusumbha (linseed oil Uma-Kusumbha Taila Taila —–(linseed oil and and safflower safflower oil) oil) ::उमा PYF कुसु SAT भजं Teor चो णं cavayenwpfAedHe व दोषकफ प तकृत|् । Taila Taila of of Uma Uma (linseed) (linseed) and and Kusumbha Kusumbha are are hot hot in in potency, potency, produce produce diseases diseases of of the the skin, skin, aggravate aggravate Kapha Kapha and and Pitta. Pitta. Vasa-Majja-Medas-(muscle-fat, Vasa-Majja-Medas-(muscle-fat, marrow marrow and and fat) fat) ::वसा Asal म जा च वात नौ seaicaHwyel बल प तकफ दौ «2 ६१ aa dT adel मां सानुग व पौ च व या मेदो ao अ प arfaa ता वव AMrepreasdt og faqareAal Vasa Vasa (muscle-fat) (muscle-fat) and and Majja Majja (bone-marrow) (bone-marrow) and and fat fat mitigate mitigate Vata, Vata, cause cause increase increase of of strength, strength, Pitta Pitta and and Kapha Kapha and and similar similar in in properties properties with with the the meat meat of of animals animals from from which which they they are are obtained. obtained. Madya Madya Varga Varga – — (group (group of of wines) wines) ::द पनं Veet रोचनं Ace म यं cHevieot ती णो णं qiteqieear तिु टपुि टदम ् «2 ६२ are स वाद ु त तकटुकम लपाकरसं CA सरम ् UCAS (AFAHSHAFAUIALT सकषायं ERRATA वरारो य तभावणक ६३ THUS Hoary ृ लघु 63 न ट न ा अ त न े यो हतं प ता द ष ू णम ् aseferat afatrgsar fed Prcarrqsory क ोतो वशोधनम ् ६४ ू मं arcifaeierny peeecied Hat ey ृ श थूल हतं Fat ं स वात ले महरं BAT यु या Wet पीतं fava वषवत ् ses अ यथा TAAL Madya Madya (wines, (wines, all all alcoholic alcoholic beverages beverages generally) generally) in in general, general, Deepana stimulate digestion, Deepana —–stimulate digestion, Rochana help taste, Rochana —–help taste, Teekshna Teekshna – — penetrate penetrate deep, deep, Ushna Ushna – — hot hot in in potency, potency, Tushti Tushti pushtida pushtida – — give give satisfaction satisfaction and and nourishment nourishment Sasvadu slightly sweet, Sasvadu tikta tikta katukam katukam —–slightly sweet, bitter bitter and and pungent pungent in in taste, taste, Amlapaka Amlapaka rasa rasa – — sour sour at at taste taste and and at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, Sara Sara —– laxative, laxative, Sakashaya Sakashaya – — slightly slightly astringent, astringent, Svara Svara – — confer confer good good voice, voice, Arogya Arogya —– improves improves health, health, Pratibha Pratibha – — talent, talent, Varna Varna – — colour colour and and complexion; complexion; Laghu easy to Laghu —–easy to digest, digest, Beneficial Beneficial to to those those having having loss loss of of sleep sleep or or excess excess sleep sleep for for both both lean lean and and stout stout persons; persons; is is nonnonviscid, viscid, capable capable of of entering entering through through minute minute pores pores and and cleansing cleansing them, them, mitigate mitigate Vata Vata and and Kapha, Kapha, all judiciously; but all these these if if used used judiciously; but used used otherwise, otherwise, they they act act like like poison. poison. 62-64½. 62-64'. गु delSotetead त ोषजननं ad, नवं , AA जीणमतो see अ यथा ६५ Te €4 नो णोपचारे ण afन faktrcaerd: व र त ुधातरु ैः Oeपेयं aongraer Page Page No. No. 63 63 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan ना यथती णमद पसंभारं HAT कलुषं न AAAS ACTHIL 7 च T ६६ CE ृ ु अ Fresh Fresh wine wine is is hard hard to to digest; digest; increases increases of of all all the the Doshas, Doshas, whereas whereas old old ones ones decrease; decrease; Contra Contra indication indication for for wines: wines: Wine Wine should should not not be be consumed consumed hot. hot. It It should should not not be be consumed consumed by by person person undergoing undergoing Virechana Virechana (purgation) (purgation) panchakarma panchakarma therapy therapy It It should should be be avoided avoided by by hungry hungry person person Wines Wines which which are are very very strong strong or or very very weak, weak, which which are are very very clear clear (like (like water) water) or or very very turbid turbid and and those those which which are are spoilt, spoilt, should should not not be be used used for for drinking. drinking. 65-66. 65-66. Sura Sura (beer) (beer) ::ग ने हनी ae: गु ः TrAeritaerhenved ु मोदराश हणीशोष त ् Feige स नल नी मे अस ETुरा अ ferret Alदो sa eAAHTHHAT kbs ृ त यमू कफावहा ६७ Sura Sura is is useful useful in in abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen, abdomen, heamorrhoids, heamorrhoids, duodenal duodenal diseases, diseases, is is lubricating, lubricating, hard hard to to digest, digest, mitigates mitigates Vata, Vata, causes causes increase increase of of fat, fat, blood, blood, milk, milk, urine urine and and Kapha. Kapha. 67. 67. Notes jaggery (treacle) Notes ::- Sura Sura is is prepared prepared by by fermenting fermenting aa mixture mixture of of water, water, flour flour of of rice, rice, jaggery (treacle) etc., etc., somewhat somewhat like like the the beer beer of of the the present present day. day. Vibhitaka Vibhitaka Sura Sura – — त गण वा णी gaat या aeedieun लघु ती णा fergied नहि त च degen a ु ा aru श ल कासव म वास वब धा मानपीनसान ६८ ् PAPAA ALATA AT MCAT AMT &C ू ना तती मदा लedt वी year प या daitahl वैभीतक Er सुरा alfacdtaaar वामये HS कु ठे न चा यथ fasatad व यते ६९ FTणे पा GWUSaTAA A aca eg Sura Sura prepared prepared from from Vibhitaka Vibhitaka is is not not very very intoxicating, intoxicating, is is easy easy to to digest, digest, good good for for health; health; not not so so harmful, harmful, (as (as other other wines) wines) in in wounds, wounds, anaemia, anaemia, and and leprosy leprosy and and other other skin skin diseases. diseases. 69. 69. Yava Yava Sura Sura ::व टि भनी saat यवसुरा ग व दोषला ।| fasefrarcit adit ु war ा Preyer Sura Sura prepared prepared from from Yava Yava – — Barley Barley – — Hordeum Hordeum vulgare vulgare (barley) (barley) causes causes constipation, constipation, is is difficult difficult to to digest, digest, non-unctous non-unctous and and aggravates aggravates all all the the three three Doshas. Doshas. 61½. 611%. Page Page No. No. 64 64 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Arista Arista —– (fermented (fermented decoctions) decoctions) ::aateezerorr go यथो यग7 ण ो अ र टः aeHeasponiye सवम यगुणा धकः> ७० ु 3we: हणीपा डुकु ठाशः शोफशोषोदर वरान ् aevtarsprary: eitreitwtetsatrey da: ७१ iedत ग ToApiaceis ¢ ु वातलः le हि कषायकट ु मकृ म ल हः> HWA Arista Arista (fermented (fermented decoctions) decoctions) possess possess properties properties of of the the materials materials from from which which it it is is prepared, prepared, and and is is more more intoxicating intoxicating of of all all alcoholic alcoholic beverages; beverages; it it is is useful useful in in disease disease of of the the duodenum, duodenum, anaemia, anaemia, skin skin diseases, diseases, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, dropsy, dropsy, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen, abdomen, fever, fever, abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, worms worms (intestinal (intestinal parasites) parasites) and and disorders disorders of of the the spleen; spleen; is is astringent, astringent, pungent pungent and and aggravates aggravates Vata. Vata. 70-71. 70-71. Mardvika Mardvika – — (wine (wine prepared prepared from from grapes) grapes) ::मा वीकं लेखनं यं ना यु णं मधुरं सरम ् अ प प ता नलं पा मेहाशः क Heated wegडु Agel: PA ृ मनाशनम ् Mardvika Mardvika (wine (wine prepared prepared from from grapes) grapes) is is scraping, scraping, good good to to the the heart, heart, not not very very hot hot in in potentcy, potentcy, sweet, sweet, Sara Sara —– promotes promotes natural natural movement movement of of body body fluids fluids (laxative), (laxative), causes causes slight slight increase increase of of Pitta Pitta and and Anila Anila (Vata), (Vata), useful useful in in anaemia, anaemia, diabetes, diabetes, hemorrhoids hemorrhoids and and worms worms (intestinal (intestinal parasites). parasites). 72. 72. Kharjura Kharjura —– (wine (wine prepared prepared from from dates) dates) ::अ माद पा तरगण FACET Gat ूरं वातलं Ace ग Teु ु ं खाज is is inferior inferior in in properties properties than than grapes, grapes, aggravates aggravates Vata, Vata, and and hard hard for for digestion. digestion. 73. 73. Sarkara Sarkara —– (wine (wine prepared prepared by by using using sugar) sugar) ::शाक सुर भ: FaTG वाद ु Ment:र: UT: यो afaAal ना तमदो AY: लघु: ॥Il ७३ Ecal 63 ॥Il Is Is sweet sweet smelling, smelling, sweet sweet in in taste, taste, good good for for the the heart, heart, not not very very intoxicating intoxicating and and easy easy to to digest. digest. स वातो गौड: तपणद पन: qerargd ats: ayere et: ।| ृ टमू शकृत ् ae Gouda Gouda (prepared (prepared by by using using molasses/treacle) molasses/treacle) increases increases volume volume of of urine, urine, faeces faeces and and flatus, flatus, is is nourishing nourishing and and increasing increasing hunger. hunger. 73½. 73. Page Page No. No. 65 65 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Sidhu juice) :Sidhu – — (wine (wine of of sugarcane sugarcane juice) :वात प caHe: तकरः सीध नेह ले म IHN वकाराहा aA Hey: ुः TASCA मे न त प वरसो वरः Aa:दः शोफोदराश wMnlateitereaa TALE az: Sidhu juice) aggravates Sidhu (prepared (prepared from from fermenting fermenting sugarcane sugarcane juice) aggravates Vata Vata and and Pitta, Pitta, decreases decreases lubrication lubrication and and diseases diseases of of Kapha, Kapha, obesity, obesity, dropsy, dropsy, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen abdomen and and haemorrhoids; juice is haemorrhoids; that that prepared prepared by by cooking cooking sugarcane sugarcane juice is best. best. 74. 74. Madhvasva Madhvasva – — (wine (wine prepared prepared from from honey) honey) ::छे द म वासव ती णो मे हपीनसकासिजत ् ॥Il ७५ Sdlacawaedenn Astiaaqarafsrd vs ॥Il Madhwasava Madhwasava (wine (wine prepared prepared from from honey) honey) breaks breaks up up hard hard masses masses (of (of Kapha Kapha etc), etc), penetrates penetrates deep, deep, useful useful in in diabetes, diabetes, chronic chronic nasal nasal catarrh catarrh and and cough. cough. 75. 75. Sukta Sukta – — (wine (wine prepared prepared from from tubers) tubers) ::रTeatedHnlereral त प तकफो लेद श Mra Atel ु तं वातन ुल ोमनम ् भ श TeMsoTHevHaNer ृ ो णती ण ा लं चकरं ALA सरम ् ७६ ECAयं VIL be द पनं RARE श शर पश Teserp पा डु कृ arene मनाशनम ् arat Sukta Sukta (wine (wine prepared prepared from from roots roots and and tubers) tubers) increases increases the the moisture moisture of of blood, blood, Pitta Pitta and and Kapha, Kapha, expels expels Vata Vata in in downward downward directions, directions, very very hot hot in in potency, potency, is is penetrating, penetrating, causes causes dryness, dryness, sour, sour, good good to to the the heart, heart, increases increases taste taste (appetite), (appetite), is is Sara Sara —– promotes promotes bowel bowel movements movements (laxative), (laxative), enhances enhances hunger, hunger, is is cold cold to to touch, touch, useful useful in in anaemia, anaemia, diseases diseases of of the the eye eye and and worms. worms. 76. 76. Sukta jaggery, sugarcane, Sukta prepared prepared by by using using jaggery, sugarcane, honey honey and and grapes grapes are are easy easy to to digest digest in in their their successive successive order. order. Asava Asava (fermented (fermented infusion) infusion) ::गड म य Aledlh मा वीक श तरम ् ॥Il ७७ Tsay Ward AG ु यथो BealcaAl we ॥Il ु े ु Aca ु तं लघ Asava Asava prepared prepared by by using using tubers, tubers, roots, roots, fruits fruits etc, etc, is is similar similar to to shukta. shukta. शा डाक UIs चासुतं चा रोचनं AZ लघु ॥Il ७८ ् काला लं Woe Mesh Wetयत HeaNet ve ॥Il Asava Asava prepared prepared by by using using Sandaki Sandaki (balls (balls of of fried fried paddy paddy mixed mixed with with spices, spices, dried dried in in sun sun and and then then deep deep fried fried in in oil) oil) and and by by other other material material (such (such as as oil-cakes oil-cakes etc) etc) which which have have turned turned sour sour by by lapse lapse of of time time are are appetizers appetizers and and easy easy to to digest. digest. Page Page No. No. 66 66 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Dhanyamla Dhanyamla (prepared (prepared rice rice and and such such other other grains) grains) ::धा या लं भे ती णो णं Teapceutetcray प तकृ पशशीतलम ् arearet Aeद Aevisot म लमहरं CAयं Cet द पनं TEAL बि तशल HHFAHEL ् ७९ ू नत ु vs श तमा थापने SEAयं AT लघु TAHA वातकफापहम ् MAA ए भरे व qed गण ै ु ते aise सौवीरकतष vara co ु य ु ोदके ८० कृ म ोगग ु माशः qUsarieeevy पा डुरोग नबहणे PReaeIeAS: ते माि वतुषै व या सतष यवैः pet कृते ce ८१ a parcaqiideurcdied ु ै च ad: Dhanyamla Dhanyamla (liquor (liquor prepared prepared by by fermenting fermenting the the water water in in which which rice rice and and such such other other grains, grains, pulses pulses etc. etc. have have been been slightly slightly cooked cooked or or merely merely washed) washed) is is purgative, purgative, penetrating, penetrating, hot hot in in potency, potency, aggravates aggravates Pitta, Pitta, cold cold to to touch, touch, relieves relieves fatigue fatigue and and exhaustion, exhaustion, increases increases appetite appetite and and hunger, hunger, useful useful in in pain pain of of the the urinary urinary bladder, bladder, ideal ideal for for use use as as Asthapana Asthapana (decoction (decoction enema), enema), good good to to the the heart, heart, easy easy to to digest, digest, balances balances Vata Vata and and Kapha. Kapha. Sauviraka Sauviraka and and Tushodaka Tushodaka also also possess possess similar similar properties, properties, useful useful in in worms, worms, heart heart disease, disease, abdominal abdominal tumor, tumor, haemorrhoids haemorrhoids and and anemia. anemia. These These are are prepared prepared from from dehusked dehusked barley barley and and and and barley-with-husk. barley-with-husk. 79-81. 79-81. Notes Notes ::- Shukta Shukta —– Fermented Fermented gruel, gruel, Dhanyamla, Dhanyamla, Sauviraka, Sauviraka, Tushodaka Tushodaka etc. etc. were were in in use use since since ancient ancient times. times. But But now now aa days days beer, beer, brandy brandy etc. etc. alcoholic alcoholic beverages beverages have have replaced replaced them. them. Mutra Mutra Varga Varga (group (group of of urine) urine) ::म ं ो stofaate अजा वम हषीगजा वो खरो वम ् Fat starsat, ू ग प तलं HaTHevreot ती णो णं AAMT लवणानुरसं कट cco HE ु ८२ C2 कृ मशोफोदरानाह डुकफा नलान ् PAM HELAMS श oI TfL ूलपाVSH गTeु मा aay च वषि WAPTAMA व कु ठाशा स जये लघु ८३ TAR asHroreli AAeaT 63 Urine Urine of of cow, cow, goat, goat, sheep, sheep, buffalo, buffalo, elephant, elephant, horse, horse, camel camel and and donkey donkey – — these these aggravate aggravate Pitta, Pitta, are are non-unctous, non-unctous, penetrating penetrating deep, deep, hot hot in in potency, potency, pungent pungent with with salt salt as as its its secondary secondary taste taste and and useful useful in in worms, worms, dropsy, dropsy, abdominal abdominal enlargement, enlargement, flatulence, flatulence, colic, colic, anemia, anemia, aggravation aggravation of of Kapha Kapha and and Vata, Vata, abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, loss loss of of taste, taste, poisoning, poisoning, leucoderma, leucoderma, skin skin diseases diseases and and piles, piles, and and are are easy easy to to digest. digest. Thus Thus ends ends the the chapter chapter – — Dravadravya Dravadravya Vijnaniya, Vijnaniya, the the fifth fifth of of Suthrasthana Suthrasthana of of Ashtang Ashtang Hriday. Hriday. Page Page No. No. 67 67 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter न वो प faateita व ानीय Food Chapter 66 Annaswaroopa Annaswaroopa अ 3eelealed Food Stuff Stuff The The sixth sixth chapter chapter of of Astanga Astanga Hridaya Hridaya is is called called as as Annaswaroopa Annaswaroopa Vijnaneeya Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. Adhyaya. It It deals deals with with details details of of different different food food materials. materials. The The chapter chapter covers covers corns, corns, grains, grains, legumes, legumes, pulses, pulses, prepared prepared foods, foods, non non veg veg food, food, leafy leafy vegetables, vegetables, fruits, fruits, salts salts and and medicinal medicinal herbs. herbs. Shuka Shuka Dhanya Dhanya Varga Varga – — Group Group of of corns corns with with spikes spikes —– HY श Mwy ast: अथ ूकधा य वगः रTeal तो महान तण Aglel ् सकलम THAT: epee: ू कः शक ु ना तः साराम द घशक रो शूकः स ग ARTSYख aT: ु ो Creesrt ु ो Were: ु ि धकः १8 qs: प पा डुः qustta: पु डर कः ु ः ares: yWarer मोदो aiartrat गौरसा रवौ का चनो म हषः श दष ू कः क ु सुमा डकः २2 Boca AST: eaूको AIH: HYAUSH: ला काः ASगला लोहवाला ASAT:याः कदमाः HEAT: शीतभी eraafreans: पत गा तपनीया च ये Gagaedteaea A चा aesये शालयः era: श eI: ुभाः ३3 Types Types of of rice rice —– Rakta Rakta (red), (red), mahan mahan (big (big sized sized rice), rice), kalama, kalama, turnaka, turnaka, shakunahruta, shakunahruta, saaramukha, saaramukha, deerghashuka deerghashuka (having (having long long sharp sharp spike spike at at the the ends), ends), sugandhika sugandhika (having (having good good smell), smell), rodhrashuka, rodhrashuka, pundra, pundra, pandu, pandu, pundarika, pundarika, Pramoda, Pramoda, Gaura Gaura (white (white rice), rice), Sariva, Sariva, Kanchana Kanchana (golden (golden colored colored rice), rice), mahisha, mahisha, Shuka, Shuka, Dushaka, Dushaka, Kusumandaka, Kusumandaka, Langala Langala Lohavala, Lohavala, Kardama, Kardama, Sheetabheeruka, Sheetabheeruka, Patanga, Patanga, stapaneeya stapaneeya (bright (bright red) red) – — these these varieties varieties of of rice rice are are good good for for consumption. consumption. -- 1-3 1-3 Qualities Qualities and and health health benefits benefits of of rice rice —– which which one one is is best? best? वादप ि न धा Fa व ृ या TATOTAT: ब ा पवचसः ु ाकरसाः FRatse Targa: PUMA: At: ४¥ कषायान प या qaal लघवो Ate मू ला हमाः ुरसाः TA Svadu Svadu rasa rasa —– sweet sweet taste taste Swadu Swadu paka paka —– sweet sweet taste taste conversion conversion after after digestion digestion Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous unctuous Vrushya Vrushya —– natural natural aphrodisiac aphrodisiac Baddhalpavarchasaha Baddhalpavarchasaha —– causes causes mild mild constipation, constipation, causes causes lesser lesser volume volume of of faeces faeces Kashaya Kashaya anurasa anurasa – — mild mild astringent astringent taste taste Pathya Pathya – — suitable suitable for for daily daily consumption consumption Laghu light to Laghu —–light to digest digest Mutrala Mutrala – — diuretic, diuretic, increases increases urine urine volume volume Hima Hima —– coolant coolant Page Page No. No. 68 68 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan श PRAT EATत ूकजेषु वर महा तमनु Hea र त त TATE TOOMPAS TT ृ णा दोषहा कलम तं चा यन ततः HAACA WA ु Ad: परे WS ५ Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Red Red variety variety of of rice rice is is the the best best quality quality (Raktashali). (Raktashali). It It relieves relieves thirst thirst and and balances balances all all the the three three Doshas. Doshas. Next Next best best to to itit is is Mahan Mahan (big (big sized sized rice) rice) variety. variety. Next Next to to it it is is Kalama Kalama variety, variety, and and the the chronology chronology continues, continues, as as in in Verse Verse 1| —– 3. 3. यवका See: हायनाः Usa पांसुबा पनैषधकादयः Ua HIey: वद ू णा IK: गरु वः िPEATE: न धाः पाक अमलाः VASAT: ले म प तलाः &६ Faq lehे HAM: Pewee स पूव yd पूव aच fetfeaar: नि दताः ृ टमू पुर षा च Yd Yavaka, Yavaka, Haayana, Haayana, Paamshu, Paamshu, Vashpa, Vashpa, Naishadha Naishadha varieties varieties of of rice rice are are Svadu Svadu – — sweet, sweet, Ushna hot in Ushna —–hot in potency, potency, Guru Guru – — hard hard to to digest, digest, Shleshmapittala Shleshmapittala —– increases increases Kapha Kapha and and Pitta Pitta Snigdha Snigdha (unctuous, (unctuous, oily) oily) Amlapaka Amlapaka – — undergoes undergoes sour sour taste taste conversion conversion after after digestion digestion Srushtamutrapureesha Srushtamutrapureesha – — increases increases bulk bulk and and volume volume of of faeces faeces and and urine urine They They are are bad bad in in their their reverse reverse order. order. Shashtika Shashtika Shali Shali – — Paddy Paddy which which matures matures in in 60 60 days days -िeasel न धो aie ा ह लघ वादिु दोष नः Feet ि थरो हमः wy: ुः tarefeadtyect: a: v७ षि टको ी हषु े ठो गौर चा सतगौरतः Shashtika Shashtika shali shali—– the the paddy paddy which which matures matures in in 60 60 days days is is best best among among all all paddy. paddy. It It is is Snigdha Snigdha -- unctuous, unctuous, oily oily Grahi Grahi – — absorbent, absorbent, useful useful in in mal-absorption mal-absorption syndrome syndrome and and diarrhea diarrhea Laghu Laghu (light (light to to digest) digest) Svadu Svadu – — sweet sweet Tridoshaghna Tridoshaghna – — balances balances all all the the three three Doshas Doshas Sthira Sthira – — brings brings in in stability stability Hima –coolant Hima —coolant It It is is of of two two types types – — Gaura Gaura —– white white and and Asita-gaura Asita-gaura (blackish (blackish white). white). ततः मा महा ी हक म Ad: PAASAS PUTAS ATLET: ू ुखाः ८¢ ृ ण ी हजत क क टा डकलावा यपारावतकश राः PFHCUSHAACAINI APA ~ ू क HA: 2ु 3ु वरको ालको TAT वालANAINASERT: ीनशारददद राः ९8 APTAAIS ु ग धनाः क ग ुणरै पा तराः CA: मत Tete: Hedeaed ु व दा च We: ृ ाः Page Page No. No. 69 69 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Next jatu Next inferior inferior to to shashtika shashtika is is mahavrihi, mahavrihi, next next to to that that is is krishnavrihi krishnavrihi and and the the others others such such as as jatu mukha, mukha, kukkutandaka, kukkutandaka, lavaka, lavaka, paravataka, paravataka, sukara, sukara, varaka, varaka, uddalaka, uddalaka, ujvala, ujvala, cina, cina, sarada, sarada, dardura, dardura, gandhana gandhana and and kuruvinda. kuruvinda. 77 bb- 10 10 aa वादरु ल वपाको tear अ यो sie: ी हः प तकरो ae: गु ः १० FaQrretaart recat vo agHAR बहुमू पुर ISAT, षो मा, Parecaa दोष वेव Wee: पाटलः The The other other types types of of rice rice are are – — sweet sweet in in taste, taste, sour sour at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, increases increases Pitta Pitta and and are are hard hard to to digest. digest. It It increases increases volume volume of of urine urine and and faeces, faeces, increases increases body body heat heat and and causes causes imbalance imbalance of – 11 of Tridosha. Tridosha. —– 10 10-11 Truna Truna dhanya dhanya Varga Varga – — group group of of grains grains produced produced by by grass grass like like plants plants —– क गक psHlgahaneaaraiic A लघ TT ु ve११ ु ो वनीवार यामाका द हमं तण ृ धा यं पवनकृ लेखनं कफ प त त ् Kangu, Kangu, Kodrava, Kodrava, Neevara, Neevara, Shyamaka Shyamaka and and other other grains grains are are cold cold in in potency, potency, easily easily digestible, digestible, increases increases Vata, Vata, Lekhana Lekhana (scraping, (scraping, scarificient) scarificient) and and balance balance Kapha Kapha and and Pitta. Pitta. —– 11 11 भAe नस Maheda धानकृ त य गब ग MASTS ae:ु ः १२ ¥2 ु हणी ृ o¢ ares:षू ः परं Wt are eflat fara: कोरद ाह Fae पश शीतो वषापहः Of Of them, them, Priyangu Priyangu helps helps in in fracture fracture healing, healing, nutritive, nutritive, nourishing nourishing and and is is hard hard to to digest. digest. Koradusha Koradusha is is grahi grahi (absorbent), (absorbent), coolant coolant and and anti-poisonous. anti-poisonous. (Yava) (Yava) Barley Barley benefits benefits ग ु ः Fang: वादःु ER सरोfacattpa व वातकृत ् Fa: यवः १३ wat: ः शीतो eat qe: °3 qua: AaAa: wedy ् जये aaत ् व थैयकरो म प तकफान ू मेदः Wear ृ यः iat पीनस वासकासो SEAEAHVS त भक ठ AMAA वगामयान ् १४ WAAR °Y Yava Yava (Barley) (Barley) is is Rooksha Rooksha (dry) (dry) Sheeta Sheeta —– cold cold Guru Guru (Heavy (Heavy to to digest) digest) Svadu Svadu – — Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) Sara Sara —– promotes promotes bowel bowel movements movements Vit-vata Vit-vata krut krut – — it it increases increases the the bulk bulk of of faeces faeces and and causes causes flatus flatus Vrushya Vrushya – — natural natural aphrodisiac aphrodisiac Stairyakrut Stairyakrut —– increases increases body body stability stability Useful Useful in in Mutrameda urinary disorder Mutrameda —–urinary disorder Pitta Pitta – — Kapha Kapha imbalance imbalance disorders disorders Page Page No. No. 70 70 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Peenasa Peenasa —– running running nose, nose, rhinitis rhinitis Shwasa Shwasa – — Asthma, Asthma, COPD, COPD, wheezing, wheezing, breathing breathing difficulty difficulty Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, cold cold Urusthamba thigh stiffness Urusthamba —–thigh stiffness Kantaroga Kantaroga – — diseases diseases of of throat throat Twakroga Twakroga —– skin skin diseases diseases – — 13 13 —– 14 14 rye Adlets: aera यूनो यवादन ो णो वं शजो Aa: यवः ुयवः BA Anuyava Anuyava ((aa small small sized sized barley) barley) is is inferior inferior in in qualities qualities to to that that of of Yava. Yava. Venuyava Venuyava (seeds (seeds of of bamboo) bamboo) is is nonnon- unctuous unctuous and and hot hot in in potency. potency. 15 15 Godhuma Godhuma – — Wheat Wheat benefits benefits – — ge: eat ae: व गु ः Pearse ि न धो siaet जीवनो arafaecer वात प तहा es १५ ृ यः शीतो स धानकार मध गोधूमः TAHA थैय कृत ् सरः SeMAPN AMYुरो wea: A: प या arch न द मुखी efrat शीता PIAA कषायमधुरा AY: लघुः १६ Gear ve Wheat Wheat is is Vrushya Vrushya —– natural natural aphrodisiac aphrodisiac Sheeta Sheeta —– cold cold Guru Guru (Heavy (Heavy to to digest) digest) Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous, unctuous, oily oily Jivaniya Jivaniya —– enlivening enlivening Vatapittaha Vatapittaha —– balances balances Vata Vata and and Pitta Pitta Sandhanakari Sandhanakari – — heals heals fractures fractures and and wounds wounds Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) Sthairyakrut Sthairyakrut – — increases increases body body stability stability Sara Sara —– promotes promotes bowel bowel movements movements Pathya Pathya – — can can be be had had on on daily daily basis basis Nandimukhi Nandimukhi variety variety of of wheat wheat is is good good for for health. health. It It is is Sheeta Sheeta —– cold cold Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) And And Laghu Laghu (light (light to to digest) digest) 16 16 इ क Siaत श yrureagast: ू धा यवगः Page Page No. No. 71 71 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Shimbidhanya Shimbidhanya varga varga —– (group (group of of legumes legumes and and pulses):pulses):- arr अथ Paresreneaast: श बीधा यवगः मु गाढक मसरू ा द श बीधा यं वब धकृत ् कषायं Tag वाद ु Asal स ाह Hea कटुपाकं हमंAH लघ HUT AT ु १७ tv मे द ः ले मा प ते ष हतं ले प ोपसे क योः Aa: eesAracay ु fed rarsaHa: Mudga Mudga (green (green gram) gram) ,, adhaki adhaki (toor (toor dal), dal), masura(lentil) masura(lentil) and and other other varieties varieties belong belong to to the the group group called called shimbidhanya shimbidhanya (those (those having having pods/legumes). pods/legumes). Vibandhakrut Vibandhakrut – — They They cause cause constipation, constipation, Kashaya, astringent sweet Kashaya, Swadu Swadu —–astringent sweet in in taste, taste, Grahi Grahi – — absorbent, absorbent, Katu Katu vipaka vipaka —– pungent pungent after after digestion, digestion, Sheeta Sheeta —– cold cold in in potency, potency, Laghu easily digestible, Laghu -–easily digestible, mitigate mitigate fat, fat, kapha, kapha, asra asra (blood) (blood) and and pitta, pitta, suited suited for for use use as as external external application application and and bathing bathing the the body body parts parts etc. etc. 17-18 17-18 aa वरो मु गो अ पचलः, कलाय व तवातलः १८ AY अ HA Aca HcTder:, HoAecafcalaat: ke राजमाषो अ नलकरो UAH Hero Kai ो बह TeMHasye: ु शकृ गु ः Among Among them, them, mudga mudga (green (green gram) gram) is is best, best, it it causes causes mild mild increase increase of of chala chala (vata): (vata): kalaya kalaya (round (round pea) pea) causes causes vata vata and and dryness, dryness, produces produces more more faeces faeces and and is is hard hard to to digest digest 18 18 Rajamasha Rajamasha (big (big sized sized black black gram) gram) increases increases Vata, Vata, it it is is dry, dry, heavy heavy to to digest digest and and increases increases bulk bulk of of faeces. faeces. Horse Horse gram gram benefits benefits – — उ णाः क पाके अ लाः श SOM: HorcM: HEM: UsHALAAATATeT °S ु ल थाः We ु ा म वासपीनसान ् १९ कासाशः नि त edsar: प त दाः WA परम ् PRIS: कफवातां HHAALTच tolled Kulttha Kulttha (horse (horse gram) gram) is is Ushna hot in Ushna —–hot in potency, potency, Amlapaka Amlapaka – — sour sour at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, cleanses cleanses semen, semen, useful useful in in urinary urinary stones, stones, Shwasa Shwasa – — Asthma, Asthma, COPD, COPD, wheezing, wheezing, breathing breathing difficulty difficulty Peenasa Peenasa —– running running nose, nose, rhinitis rhinitis Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, cold cold Kapha Kapha —– Vata Vata diseases diseases But But it it increases increases bleeding bleeding disorders disorders and and is is not not recommended recommended in in such such conditions, conditions, like like menorrhagia. menorrhagia. 19 19 Page Page No. No. 72 72 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Nishpava Nishpava (flat (flat bean) bean) न पावो वात ता EaeAAAAA त यमू करो ग fersqral STATAप CATA IS:ु ः २० 2o ERT faarel सरो वदाह THHHHMAITATTIG: शु कफशोष वषापहः Nishpava Nishpava (flat (flat bean) bean) aggravates aggravates vata, vata, pitta, pitta, bleeding bleeding disorders, disorders, itit increases increases breast breast milk milk production production and and promotes promotes urine urine formation. formation. It It is is Guru Guru (Heavy (Heavy to to digest) digest) Sara Sara —– promotes promotes bowel bowel movements movements Vidahi Vidahi – — increases increases burning burning sensation sensation It It is is not not good good for for eyes eyes and and semen semen quality. quality. It It decreases decreases Kapha, Kapha, inflammation inflammation and and is is useful useful in in poisoning. poisoning. 20 20 Masha Black gram Masha -–Black gram benefits: benefits: माषः न धो बल ले म मल प तकरः सरः ary: िFeast TorVereA Acted: AX: २१ 2 ग नलहा Fag: वादःु श TRON fetal Urge ु णो अ ु वृ वरे ककृत ् fata Black Black gram gram is is Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous, unctuous, Balya Balya – — increases increases strength, strength, increases increases kapha kapha and and Pitta Pitta Malakara Malakara – — increases increases bulk bulk of of faeces, faeces, Sara Sara —– laxative, laxative, Guru not easily Guru – — not easily digestible, digestible, Ushna hot in Ushna —–hot in potency, potency, Vatahara Vatahara – — mitigate mitigate Vata, Vata, Madhura Madhura – — sweet sweet in in taste, taste, shukra shukra vruddhikara, vruddhikara, Virekakrut Virekakrut —– increases increases semen semen and and promotes promotes ejaculation ejaculation strength. strength. 21 21 Helferन Aaa फला माषव ACA व याcps काका डोला ATCA: मगु तयोः Fruits Fruits of of kakandola kakandola and and atmagupta atmagupta (Mucuna (Mucuna pruriens) pruriens) are are similar similar to to black black gram gram in in qualities. qualities. 22 22 Sesame Sesame seed seed benefits: benefits: sRCaCa heat उ ण व यो fet: हमः Tat पश क े यो geatecol ब यि तलो Te: गु ः अ पमू ः He: कटुः We पाके मे अि नकफ प तकृत23 ् २३ Heua: AUTधा HisetHwpficdhd Tila Tila (sesamum) (sesamum) is is Ushna Ushna —– hot hot in in potency potency ,, Tvachya Tvachya – — good good for for the the skin, skin, Sheetasparsha Sheetasparsha —– cold cold on on touch, touch, Keshya Keshya – — good good for for hairs, hairs, Page Page No. No. 73 73 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Balya Balya – — strengthening, strengthening, Guru Guru – — hard hard to to digest, digest, Alpamutra Alpamutra —– produces produces little little quantity quantity of of urine, urine, Katu Katu paka paka —– pungent pungent at at the the end end of of digestion digestion Medhakrut increases intelligence, Medhakrut – — increases intelligence, Agnikrut Agnikrut – — increases increases digestive digestive function, function, and and increases increases kapha kapha and and pitta. pitta. 23 23 Seeds Seeds of of uma uma (linseed) (linseed) िTeaser न धोमा वाद ु त तो णा कफ प तकर ग Fargfrareon Hwa Te:ु ः शु कटुः पाक वत ् बीजं THUshEche: Wh,े , त Aad Sat क PAA 2W ु सम ु भजम ् २४ Seeds Seeds of of uma uma (linseed) (linseed) is is Snigdha Snigdha unctuous, unctuous, Madhura bitter in Madhura Tikta Tikta —– sweet sweet – — bitter in taste, taste, Ushna hot in Ushna —–hot in potency, potency, increases increases kapha kapha and and pitta, pitta, hard hard to to digest, digest, not not good good for for vision vision and and semen, semen, pungent pungent at at the the end end of of digestion. digestion. Similar Similar are are the the seeds seeds of of kusumbha. kusumbha. 24 24 माषो 314 अ Advaat, सव ववरो, यवकः AIST Yah: श Yay ूकजेषु Tच Masa Masa (black (black gram) gram) in in the the group group of of simbija simbija (legumes) (legumes) and and yavaka yavaka (small (small barley) barley) in in the the group group of of sukaja sukaja (cereals) (cereals) are are inferior. inferior. नवं यम भ यि द, लघ संव सरो षतम ् ad धा aeyaraied, TY ु TART शी ज म तथा न तष eases AMT सeeू यं felreay oleae ु ं य ुि तभिजतम ् Fresh Fresh grains grains (just (just harvested) harvested) are are abhisyandi abhisyandi (causes (causes excess excess exudation exudation from from tissue tissue pores pores and and block block them them by by it), it), those those old old by by one one year year are are easily easily digestible. digestible. Those Those which which grow grow quickly, quickly, those those which which are are removed removed of of their their husk, husk, those those that that are are properly properly fried fried are are also also easy easy to to digest. digest. 25 25 इ श बीधा यवगः saत faredeneaast: Thus Thus ends ends the the group group of of shimbi shimbi dhanyas dhanyas (legumes). (legumes). Page Page No. No. 74 74 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Kritannna Kritannna vargavarga- (group (group of of prepared prepared foods) foods) HUE Palea अथ कृ ता न // Veet प वा न aT: वगः म डपेया वले पीनां HeweIeaA ओदान य Tच ATA लाघवम ् २६ Austra Uae वू PAaeAA aet: यथाप शव त AUST म डो Aloe वातानुलोमनः त पाचनो MAA धातस FStonietaraaset: ु ा यकृत ् २७ ृ ला नदोषशेष नः Wael ोतोमादवकृ वे द स धु य त Tete चानलम ् alatareapeeael Ge eyeratel Manda, Manda, peya, peya, vilepi vilepi and and odana odana are are preparations preparations of of rice rice or or other other grains grains cooked cooked in in water. water. Manda Manda -- The The thin thin fluid fluid resembling resembling water, water, drained drained out out immediately immediately after after boiling boiling is is known known as as manda; manda; Peya slightly thicker Peya —–slightly thicker to to manda manda but but still still only only liquid liquid is is peya; peya; Vilepi Vilepi—– the the next next stage stage with with more more of of solid solid grain grain and and less less of of fluid fluid is is called called vilepi vilepi and and Odana the last Odana —–the last stage stage which which is is solid solid without without fluid fluid portion portion is is known known as as odana. odana. Manda, Manda, peya, peya, vilepi vilepi and and odana odana are are more more easily easily digestible digestible in in their their preceding preceding order order of of enumeration. enumeration. Manda easiest to Manda ~–easiest to digest. digest. Odana Odana —– is is comparatively comparatively harder harder to to digest. digest. Manda (thin fluid Manda —–(thin fluid drained drained out) out) Manda Manda is is the the best. best. It It causes causes easy easy movement movement of of faeces faeces and and flatus, flatus, relieves relieves thirst thirst and and exhaustion, exhaustion, It It nullifies nullifies residual residual doshas. doshas. Hence Hence it it is is used used as as diet diet after after Panchakarma, Panchakarma, wherein wherein all all the the Doshas Doshas are are eliminated. eliminated. Manda Manda helps helps digestion, digestion, restores restores the the normalcy normalcy of of the the tissues, tissues, causes causes softness softness of of the the channels, channels, perspiration perspiration and and kindles kindles the the digestive digestive activity. activity. 26-27 26-27 ½ 4 ु त ृ णा ला नदौब यकु रोग वरापहा AC २८ TaAMferatseoAPASASATACT eG मलान प या Yar पेया aoerardet द पनपाचनी AoA ुलोमनी WaT Peya Peya (more (more liquid, liquid, less less solid) solid) relieves relieves hunger, hunger, thirst, thirst, exhaustion, exhaustion, debility, debility, diseases diseases of of the the abdomen abdomen and and fevers, fevers, if if it it causes causes easy easy elimination elimination of of faeces, faeces, good good for for all, all, kindles kindles appetite appetite and and helps helps digestion. digestion. 28 28 वलेपी anfeoit ा हणी equr या त द पनी Far हता २९ fact qeorrestt 2 ृ णा नी arucfh णा 7 . 1 fore Da रोगसंशु द ब ु ल नेहपा यनम ् Vilepi Vilepi (less (less liquid liquid more more solid) solid) withholds withholds discharge discharge of of fluids fluids from from the the body, body, good good for for the the heart, heart, relieves relieves thirst, thirst, kindles kindles appetite, appetite, ideal ideal for for all, all, especially especially for for those those suffering suffering from from ulcers, ulcers, eye eye diseases, diseases, those those who who have have been been administered administered Panchakarma Panchakarma purification purification therapies, therapies, who who are are weak weak and and who who have have been been given given fats fats for for drinking drinking as as part part of of Snehana Snehana therapy therapy (before (before Panchakarma). Panchakarma). 29 29 aula: स ुधौतः wae: teredivar सत व नो अ य तो मा dlecit चौदनो og: लघुः ृ ः िRacal य चा नेय ौषध वाथसा धतो Aaa GITEAAAA A भ sSeavger: ृ टत डुलः वपर तो ग ीरमांसा यैय च attic: सा धतः fawtat ae:ु ः araraedtied Page Page No. No. 75 75 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Odana Odana (solid) (solid) prepared prepared with with grains grains which which have have been been washed washed well, well, in in which which the the entire entire water water has has evaporated evaporated and and which which is is devoid devoid of of hot hot fumes fumes is is easy easy to to digest; digest; likewise likewise that that prepared prepared along along with with addition addition of of decoction decoction of of medicinal medicinal substances substances of of hot hot potency potency or or that that prepared prepared with with fried fried grains grains are are also also easily easily digestible; digestible; the the opposite opposite of of these these that that prepared prepared with with addition addition of of milk, milk, muttom muttom etc., etc., are are hard hard to to digest. digest. इ sfaत य यायोगमाना यैः सवमा दशेत ् qeafrardtrarened: waanfesta In In this this manner, manner, the the effects effects of of the the grain, grain, kind kind of of processing, processing, admixtures, admixtures, quantity quantity and and other other aspects aspects should should all all be be determined. determined. 30-31 30-31 ½ '% Mamsa Mamsa rasa rasa (meat (meat soup) soup) Jerr: qvaeaayeal Ca: ब ंहृ णः Pray ीणनो व णहो रसः ृ य च ु यो qvrel Mamsa Mamsa rasa rasa (meat (meat soup) soup) is is Brihmana Brihmana —– nourishing nourishing Preenana gives satisfaction, Preenana – — gives satisfaction, Vrushya Vrushya —– aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, Chakshushya Chakshushya – — good good for for the the eye eye (vision) (vision) and and Vranaha Vranaha – — heals heals ulcers ulcers and and wounds. wounds. 32 32 Mudgasupa Mudgasupa (soup (soup of of green green gram) gram) मौ ग तु प शु णक ठा रो गणाम ् Alesed Wes:यः सं Bepgaoravariantaroney Mudgasupa Mudgasupa (soup (soup of of green green gram) gram) is is good good for for health, health, for for those those who who have have undergone undergone Panchakarma Panchakarma purification purification threrapies threrapies and and for for those those suffering suffering from from ulcers, ulcers, diseases diseases of of the the throat throat and and eyes. eyes. 32 32 ½ 2 Kulattha Kulattha Supa Supa (horse (horse gram gram soup) soup) वातान ल थो seria गुse मतNन aeneerat pleat ु ोमी कौल ू ी तNtiered ू निजत~ ् 2 c Kulattha Kulattha Supa Supa (horse (horse gram gram soup) soup) is is Vatanulomi Vatanulomi —– initiates initiates normal normal movement movement of of Vata Vata Useful Useful in in Gulma Gulma (abdominal (abdominal tumor), tumor), tuni tuni and and pratituni pratituni (pains (pains of of the the groin groin region) region) 33 33 Page Page No. No. 76 76 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Eatables Eatables prepared prepared from from Tila Tila (sesamum) (sesamum) तल प याक वकृ तः श व ढकम ् faatvaratapia: eset ु कशाकं fracHy शा डाकोवटकं qMUsTHldedh लपनं ग Etatनं दोषलं ANVol FAUT TSु Eatables Eatables prepared prepared from from Tila Tila (sesamum), (sesamum), Pinyaka Pinyaka (residue (residue of of sesamum sesamum after after the the oil oil is is taken taken out), out), dried dried leafy leafy vegetables, vegetables, germinated germinated grains, grains, shandaki shandaki vataka vataka (balls (balls of of fried fried rice rice dried dried in in sun sun and and then then fried fried in in oil) oil) are are not not good good for for eyes, eyes, increase increase the the doshas, doshas, cause cause debility debility and and are are hard hard to to digest. digest. 34 34 Hence, Hence, Ayurveda Ayurveda does does not not recommend recommend germinated germinated grains. grains. Rasala Rasala—– रसाला geuft बंहृ णी qsar व ृ या िTeaser न धा sear ब या Vfayer च दा ।| Tare Rasala Rasala – — curds curds churned churned and and added added with with pepper pepper powder powder and and sugarsugar- it it causes causes body body weight weight increase, increase, itit is is aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, unctuous, unctuous, improves improves strength strength and and improves improves taste. taste. Panaka juice) Panaka (vegetable (vegetable // fruit fruit juice) म ुत ् Je त ृ FAA लमहरं Wet पानकंWore ीणनं ग TAG TSु ॥३५॥ 135 व टि भ म यगुणं च fasefrar Aa AMacas T तत Ad ् ।| ू लं qaयं यथा Relieves Relieves exhaustion, exhaustion, hunger, hunger, thirst thirst and and fatigue, fatigue, gives gives satisfaction. satisfaction. It It is is generally generally hard hard to to digest, digest, stays stays long long in in the the stomach, stomach, is is diuretic diuretic and and good good to to the the heart. heart. Its Its properties properties depends depends on on material material from from which which it it is is prepared. prepared. 35 35 Laja Laja (fried (fried paddy) paddy) लाजा तृ asiede छ यतीसार मे हमे द: कफि छद: ॥३६॥ Sea AgAa: Hwfesa: 136Il कास प तोपशमना द पना लघवो हमा: ।| araicadaaa doen waat ar: Laja Laja is is prepared prepared by by frying frying paddy. paddy. Relieves Relieves thirst, thirst, vomiting, vomiting, diarrhea, diarrhea, diabetes, diabetes, obesity, obesity, mitigates mitigates kapha, kapha, cough cough and and pitta, pitta, increases increases appetite, appetite, easy easy to to digest digest and and cold cold in in potency. potency. 36 36 प थ या: कफ व ट भका रण: ॥३७॥ GUT INA Toa: HH FASS: 1130 ुरवो ब ृ ुका ग Prithuka Prithuka (parboiled (parboiled and and flaked flaked paddy) paddy) is is hard hard to to digest, digest, strengthening strengthening increases increases kapha kapha and and causes causes constipation. constipation. Prithuka Prithuka is is prepared prepared by by boiling boiling paddy paddy for for short short while while and and pounding pounding it it with with pestle pestle and and mortar. mortar. 37 37 Page Page No. No. 77 77 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan धाना व टि भनी ure fasefearet खनी ग war ा तपणी auf ले chaeit ae:ु : ।| Dhana Dhana (fried (fried barely barely and and other other grains) grains) stays stays long long in in the the stomach stomach causing causing indigestion, indigestion, is is dry, dry, satisfying, satisfying, scarifying, scarifying, and and hard hard to to digest. digest. Dhana Dhana is is made made by by frying frying barely barely which which is is soaked soaked in in water water and and saktu saktu is is flour flour either either raw raw or or fried. fried. Saktu Saktu (corn (corn flour) flour) Graal स तवो AHA: लघवः ejexAeATAAAVMey ु त ृ मने ामय णान 38 ् 38 नि त Tea: स तपणाः Wetted पान स य Va एव Tear: बल दाः tated नोदका त रता न afaet वन नशायां केवलान 39 aaniedhtateat reat नA adele ् 39 वजैि छ वा स तन वा TeeL बहून ् atन भeco Teqeacalet ु वा afन afastocad ू या न aT Corn Corn flour flour is is easy easy to to digest, digest, relieves relieves hunger, hunger, thirst, thirst, fatigue fatigue ,, eye eye diseases diseases and and wounds, wounds, is is nutritious nutritious and and taken taken as as aa drink drink gives gives strength strength immediately. immediately. Corn Corn flour flour should should not not be be eaten eaten without without drinking drinking water water in in between, between, should should not not be be consumed consumed twice twice in in aa day day Should Should not not be be had had at at night night Should Should not not be be taken taken solely, solely, without without other other kinds kinds of of foods. foods. Should Should not not be be had had after after meals meals It It should should not not be be hard hard to to chew chew and and it it should should not not had had in in excess excess quantity. quantity. 38-39 38-39 Many Many tasty tasty eatables eatables are are prepared prepared from from the the flour flour of of rice rice and and other other cereals, cereals, horse horse gram, gram, bengal bengal gram gram and and other other legumes, legumes, with with addition addition of of spices, spices, sour sour and and fragrant fragrant substances, substances, some some of of them them are are boiled boiled in in water, water, some some are are steamed, steamed, some some are are fried fried in in oil oil etc, etc, vegetables vegetables like like onions, onions, brinjals, brinjals, etc. etc. are are also also used used in in some some preparations. preparations. These These are are usually usually consumed consumed as as side–dishes side—dishes or or snacks snacks in in between between meals. meals. However However in in view view of of their their difficult difficult digestibility, digestibility, some some warnings warnings have have been been enumerated enumerated above. above. प याको Tarra लपनो wait ो fasereit व ट भी Eequu: ि टदष Toarenl Ilvoll ू ण: ॥४०॥ Pinyaka Pinyaka produces produces giddiness, giddiness, dryness dryness indigestion indigestion and and vitiates vitiates vision. vision. Pinyaka Pinyaka is is the the residue residue of of sesamum, sesamum, groundnut groundnut and and other other oil oil seeds, seeds, after after extracting extracting the the oil oil from from it. it. वेसवारो ae: गु : िeasel न धो soittasade: बलोपचयवधन:| । aaant म गरु वो SAMA: यथा यगण AeMieaed Ye Il ु गा दजा तु Ia ु ानुगा: ॥| ४१॥ Vesavara Vesavara is is meat, meat, cut cut into into minute minute bits, bits, added added with with spices spices like like pepper, pepper, ginger ginger etc, etc, and and roasted roasted or or fried. fried. Vegetable Vegetable vesavara vesavara is is prepared prepared with with flour flour or or pulses pulses of of various various kinds, kinds, added added with with spices spices etc. etc. Vesavara Vesavara is is hard hard to to digest, digest, is is unctuous, unctuous, increases increases strength strength and and builds builds the the body. body. Vesavara Vesavara prepared prepared from from green green gram gram and and others others is is hard hard to to digest digest and and possess possess properties properties similar similar to to the the material material from from which which it it is is prepared. prepared. 41 41 कुकूलकपर ा क व गार वपा चतान ् एकयोनीं लघुि व यादपूपानु तरो तरम ् Page Page No. No. 78 78 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Eatables Eatables cooked cooked by by steaming, steaming, baked baked on on hot hot mud mud or or iron iron pan, pan, in in aa vessel vessel kept kept over over aa stove, stove, inside inside aa hearth hearth and and baked baked by by placing placing on on burning burning coal coal directly directly are are easy easy to to digest digest in in the the successive successive order order of of their their enumeration. enumeration. This This means, means, eatables eatables prepared prepared directly directly over over coal coal is is easier easier to to digest digest than than eatables eatables cooked cooked by by steaming. steaming. 42 42 इ त Palea कृता न Trae /प वा न aT: वगः Sit Thus Thus ends ends the the groups groups of of prepared prepared foods. foods. Mamsa Mansa varga varga —– (group (group of of meats) meats) ह रणैणकुर ग गोकण Fee: मग BheborarsararenapOy ृ मातक ृ ाः UMAFAAPAAIMCAT FIT: शशश बरचा कशरभा या म ग ृ ाः TAT: म ृताः Mriga Mriga varga varga (deer (deer etc) etc) ::Harina Harina (antelope, (antelope, fawn) fawn) Kuranga Kuranga (type (type of of deer), deer), Arksa Arksa (white (white footed footed antelope) antelope) Gokarna Gokarna (Deer (Deer antelop), antelop), Mrigamatrika Mrigamatrika (Red (Red coloured coloured hare hare like like deer), deer), Shasha Shasha (( rabbit), rabbit), Shambara Shambara (deer (deer with with branched branched horns), horns), Charushka Charushka (gazelle) (gazelle) sarabha sarabha (eight (eight footed footed animal) animal) Etc. Etc. are are known known as as Mriga Mriga 43. 43. These These are are different different kinds kinds of of deer, deer, antelope antelope and and bucks. bucks. Some Some of of them them are are having having horns, horns, some some are are hornless, hornless, all all of of them them are are herbivorous herbivorous and and live live in in dry dry regions regions especially especially shrubby shrubby forests. forests. In In olden olden days days they they were were being being hunted hunted mainly mainly for for food. food. Viskira Viskira varga varga —– group group of of birds birds which which scratch scratch ground ground with with legs legs to to pick pick food food ::- aaaldinadherdacHarcperpar: लाववात कवत रर तव मककmo ु क ु भाः 2 Psa क प जलोपच ाeATHNP यचकोरकु SATS: बाहवः वतको afder व तका da चैव fafeak: ति त रः sane: करः Pret शखी adel aardsretrancanere arta fren: ता ाचN ड ा यबकरगोनद ग रव तकाः ू तधा ाभवरटा कराः AMT शारपरे URNS Teaया च Taवि SAAT: Lava Lava (bustard (bustard quail), quail), Vartika Vartika (bush (bush quail), quail), Vartira Vartira (rain (rain quail), quail), Raktavartma Raktavartma (red (red eyed eyed owl), owl), Kukkubha Kukkubha (wild (wild cock), cock), Kapinjala Kapinjala (black (black partridge), partridge), Upachakra Upachakra (small (small greek greek pheasant), pheasant), Chakora Chakora (greek (greek pheasant), pheasant), Kurubahava, Kurubahava, Vartaka Vartaka (button (button quail), quail), Vartika( Vartika( bush bush quail), quail), Tittiri Tittiri (grey (grey partridge), partridge), krakara krakara (black (black partridge), partridge), sikhi sikhi (peacock), (peacock), tamracuda tamracuda (domestic (domestic cock), cock), bakara bakara (small (small creane), creane), gonarda gonarda (siberian (siberian crane), crane), girivartika girivartika (mountain (mountain quail), quail), Sharapada Sharapada (a (a kind kind of of sparrow), sparrow), indrabha indrabha (hedge (hedge sparrow), sparrow), varata varata (goose) (goose) etc. etc. belong belong to to the the group group known known as as viskira viskira (birds (birds which which scratch scratch the the ground ground with with their their legs legs and and picks picks up up their their food.) food.) 44-45 44-45 Page Page No. No. 79 79 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan PratudaPratuda- group group of of birds birds which which peck peck the the food food and and eat eat – — HasstanelYesyse aT: जीव जीवकदा यूहभ ृ गा apa वशुकसा रकाः लCATH वाको कलहर pore तकपोतचटकादयः HTAT: Jivanijivaka Jivanijivaka (greek (greek partridge partridge ), ), datyuha datyuha (gallinule), (gallinule), bhrunagahwa bhrunagahwa (shrike), (shrike), suka suka (parakeet), (parakeet), sarika sarika (mynah), (mynah), latva latva (wild (wild sparrow), sparrow), kokila kokila (cuckoo), (cuckoo), harita harita (grey (grey peigon), peigon), kapota kapota (wood (wood peigon), peigon), Chataka Chataka (house (house sparrow) sparrow) etc. etc. belong belong to to the the group group of of pratuda pratuda (birds (birds which which peck peck the the food food and and eat). eat). 46 46 Bileshaya Bileshaya -- group group of of creatures creatures that that live live in in burrows burrows -तद कगोधा ह वा वदा या ferekera: बलेशयाः Weer: sHatenfeeataerear ु ाः भे Bheka Bheka (frog), (frog), godha godha (iguana (iguana lizard), lizard), Ahi, Ahi, (snake), (snake), swavid swavid (hedgehog) (hedgehog) etc. etc. are are bileshaya bileshaya (living (living in in burrows). burrows). 47 47 Prasaha living beings Prasaha varga varga —–living beings which which catch catch food food by by teeth, teeth, tear tear and and eat eat ::गोखरा वतरोष व AHA वी प संSavaTET: ह वानराः ARTA Terाि Vaa माजारम क या वHA क र वः ATARI ALATT: ूषHUTT ृ ब ुत MT HARIH IT AG aT: लोपाकज बुक ATA येनचाषवा तादवायसाः MEAT APRु ररगMृ ोल A ूक HPASTAT: शश नीभासक कु ल गकाः ध सहा म ग qa Aerुहा चे aiaत weer Farater: ू मका मध ृ प णः Go Go (cow), (cow), khara khara (ass, (ass, donkey), donkey), aswatara aswatara (mule),ustra (mule),ustra (camel), (camel), ashwa ashwa (horse), (horse), dwipi dwipi (leopard), (leopard), Simha Simha (lion), (lion), Aruksha Aruksha (dear), (dear), Vanara Vanara (monkey), (monkey), marjala marjala (cat), (cat), musaka musaka (rat, (rat, mice), mice), Vyaghra Vyaghra (tiger), jambuka (tiger), Vrka Vrka (jackal), (jackal), babhru babhru (large (large brown brown mongoose mongoose tarksu tarksu (hyena), (hyena), lopaka lopaka (fox, (fox, jambuka (jackal), joy), vantada (jackal), syena syena (hawk), (hawk), casa casa (blue (blue joy), vantada (dog), (dog), vayasa vayasa (crow), (crow), sasaghni sasaghni (golden (golden eagle eagle ), ), bhasa bhasa (bread (bread vulture vulture ), ), kurara kurara (osprey), (osprey), grdhra grdhra (vulture), (vulture), uluka uluka (owl), (owl), kulingaka kulingaka (sparrow (sparrow hawk), hawk), dhumika dhumika (owlet), (owlet), madhuha madhuha (honey (honey buzzard), buzzard), these these and and other other animals animals and and birds birds belong belong to to the the group group known known as as prasaha prasaha (which (which catch catch their their food food by by the the teeth, teeth, tear tear it it and and eat.) eat.) 48-49 48-49 ½ % Mahamriga Mahanmriga – — big big animals animals – — RACV TAROT: वराहम हष USHERS य क रो हतवारणाः स म गवय च महाम GARG: Gsगो TAA Ag:ृगाः ृ र चमरः ख Varaha Varaha (boar), (boar), mahisa mahisa (buffalo), (buffalo), nyanku nyanku (dog (dog deer), deer), rohita rohita (big (big deer), deer), ruru ruru (swamp (swamp deer), deer), varana varana (elephant), (elephant), srmara srmara (Indian (Indian wild wild boar), boar), chamara chamara (yak), (yak), khadga khadga (rhinoceros) (rhinoceros) and and Gavaya Gavaya (goyal (goyal ox) ox) are are known known as as mahamriga mahamriga (animals (animals of of huge huge body). body). 50 50 Page Page No. No. 80 80 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Apchara Apchara varga varga –(aquatic —(aquatic birds) birds) :: -हंससारसकाद बबककार डव लवाः FRING HIGFAT HRSA: TAP AITIHEIACT Ea अ HPT: बलाको ोषच ा वम गPISA चराः ु ौ चादयो Hamsa Hamsa (swan), (swan), sarasa sarasa (Indian (Indian crane), crane), kadamba kadamba (grey (grey legged legged goose), goose), baka baka (heron), (heron), karandava karandava (white (white breasted breasted goose), goose), palva palva (pelican), (pelican), balaka balaka (crane),utkrosa (crane),utkrosa (mattard), (mattard), chakrahva(ruddy chakrahva(ruddy Sheldrake), Sheldrake), madgu madgu (small (small cormorant), cormorant), krouncha krouncha (pound (pound heron) heron) etc. etc. are are know know as as apcara apcara (aquatic (aquatic birds birds ).51 ).51 Matsya Matsya varga varga – — group group of of fish fish -- AeAया रो Uisaradierpaepesieensher: म हतापाठ नकूमकु भीरककटाः UsAsAaIGHarnvraay aiega: श काः ुि तश खो श बूकशफर व म चि च शशुमार AAS त म गलाः Gehlmarant eT: ुलूक न मकर Rea राजी च ल चमा या च ATA मांस म CATE याहुरTCE टधा Tehfateaarearead म वै क रकं for क च wade ातद बलेशयम ् Fea o farce ु ं च ृ यं aaa ासहं च यम टधा Ue UT महाम AgesaAva ATAU ृ यमपचरं मा Rohita Rohita (red (red fish), fish), pathina pathina (boal), (boal), kurma kurma (tortoise), (tortoise), kumbhira kumbhira (gavial, (gavial, alligator), alligator), karkata karkata (crab), (crab), sukti sukti (pearl (pearl mussel), mussel), sankha sankha (conch (conch shell), shell), urdu urdu (otter), (otter), sambuka sambuka (comman (comman snail), snail), safari safari (large (large glistening glistening fish), fish), varmi varmi candrika candrika 9a 9a kind kind of of cat cat fish) fish) culuki culuki 9propoise, 9propoise, seahog seahog )) pakra pakra (crocodile), (crocodile), makara makara (crocodile), (crocodile), sisumara sisumara (dolphin), (dolphin), timingala timingala (whale (whale , shark), shark), raji raji (snake (snake fish), fish), cilicima cilicima (red (red striped striped fish) fish) and and others others belongs belongs to to group group of of matsya matsya (fishes). (fishes). Thus Thus eight eight kinds kinds of of (source (source of of )) mamsa mamsa (meat) (meat) are are enumerated. enumerated. 52-53 52-53 ½ '4 योiasdard न वजावी cafassiracaetarrad या म गोचर वाद नि चते Goat Goat and and sheep sheep are are not not included included in in any any particular particular group group because because of of their their mixed mixed heredity heredity and and living living in in all all types types oo lands. lands. 54 54 MAA Asta seatयौ aeaneit आ या या जा गलानूपा म साधारणौ cat मत ृ ौ Out Out of of the the eight eight groups groups mentioned mentioned above, above, the the first first three three (Mriga, (Mriga, viskriya viskriya and and pratuda) pratuda) are are also also know know as as Jangala Jangala (Vata (Vata dominant); dominant); the the last last three three (mahamriga, (mahamriga, Jalacara Jalacara and and Matsya), Matsya), are are also also called called anupa anupa (Kapha (Kapha dominant); dominant); The tridosha balancing) The middle middle two two (bilesaya (bilesaya and and prasaha) prasaha) are are known known as as sadharana sadharana ( (tridosha balancing) 54 54 ½ 4 The The region region of of land land which which has has dry dry forests forests (shrubby) (shrubby) with with less less rainfall rainfall is is Jangala, Jangala, the the region. region. This This region region is is Vata Vata dominant. dominant. Area Area with with plenty plenty of of rainfall rainfall and and water-logged water-logged is is anupa anupa (Kapha (Kapha dominant), dominant), The The region region which which has has neither neither too too much much of of dryness dryness nor nor too too much much of of moisture moisture is is Sadharana Sadharana (temperature). (temperature). The The nature nature and and qualities qualities of of the the land land are are also also seen seen in in all all the the flora flora and and fauna fauna of of the the region. region. Page Page No. No. 81 81 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan त मला: शीता लघवो जा गला Tat: हता: ॥५५॥ aa बsean: gat weal arseren SSI प तो तरे वातम सि नपाते कफान ecteay aTaHeaये Aiea Pepysगु े ।| Meat Meat of of the the Jangala Jangala group group are are the the best best ,, they they cause cause constipation, constipation, are are cold cold (in (in potency), potency), easily easily digestible, digestible, and and good good in in sannipata sannipata with with great great increase increase of of pitta pitta and and moderate moderate increase increase of of vata, vata, mild mild increase increase of of kapha kapha following following them. them. 55 55 द पन: HEH: कटुक: Veh पाके Tey ाह Bay ो A: हम: शश: aloe: eT: ॥५६॥ 1156 Il The The flesh flesh of of shasha shasha (rabbit), (rabbit), enhances enhances hunger, hunger, pungent pungent after after digestion, digestion, water water absorbent absorbent and and cold cold in in potency potency 56 56 SIGMA ईषद बं ह वतकादयः ु णगु ि न धा FECT ृ ण AcHqaa: ति त र ते व प AY वरो AUisascerelppl मेधाि नबलशु कृत ् fafcaReacary ae: WA cater ाह aval व य sifer अ नलो ctice तसि नपातहरः परम ् met The The flesh flesh of of the the vartaka vartaka (button (button quail) quail) and and others others are are slightly slightly hot hot in in potency, potency, hard hard to to digest, digest, unctuous unctuous and and make make the the body body stout. stout. Tittiri Tittiri (sparrow) (sparrow) is is still still better, better, makes makes for for increase increase of of intelligence, intelligence, power power of of digestion, digestion, strength strength and and semen, semen, with-holds with-holds discharges discharges of of fluids fluids from from the the body, body, improves improves the the skin skin complexion, complexion, effectively effectively mitigates mitigates sannipata sannipata with with increase increase of of vata. vata. 57 57 ½ '4 ना तप यः ret शखी प ो वरवयो शाम ् amfaqee: cee:यः sitaearaareeiey The The flesh flesh of of shikhi shikhi (peacock) (peacock) is is not not very very good good generally generally but but good good for for the the ears ears (hearing), (hearing), voice, voice, ageing ageing (to (to slow slow down down ageing), ageing), and and eyes eyes (vision), (vision), 58 58 aeded HPrHel FI: ITV:ु ः त व च क ा य तु LlsAe ले मलो ग ु कुटो व ृ यः MAE मे नलकराः FUNधो अ afer: याः HAM: कराः सोपच FEAT: ATI:काः ग सलवणः काणकपोतः Te:ु ः HAG: HOTHAT: सवदोषक Adareृ त ् Flesh Flesh of of cock cock (wild (wild fowl), fowl), is is similar similar (to (to that that of of peacock), peacock), and and is is aphrodisiac; aphrodisiac; that that of of the the domesticated domesticated fowl fowl increase increase kapha kapha and and is is hard hard to to digest; digest; flesh flesh of of krakara krakara (black (black partridge) partridge) increases increases intelligence intelligence and and digestion, digestion, is is good good for for the the heart heart (or (or the the mind); mind); similar similar is is the the flesh flesh of of upachakraka; upachakraka; that that of of kana kana kapota kapota is is hard hard to to digest, digest, slightly slightly saity saity and and increases increases all all the the doshas. doshas. 59 59 ½ 4 चटकाः ले मलाः िATT न धा वात नाः श UEHT: LAST: ATE: Vere: WL ् ु लाः परम Meat Meat of of cataka cataka increases increases kapha, kapha, is is unctuous, unctuous, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and best best to to increase increase semen. semen. 60 60 ग चातो यथो तरम ् TROUPPATIANT FATA AeAleaA ु णि न धमधुरा वगा FApald Feaया वात ae:नाः कफ Hele: म प तलाः ू शु कृतोव ब Page Page No. No. 82 82 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Flesh Flesh of of animals animals of of the the next next succeeding succeeding group group (bilesaya), (bilesaya), are are hard hard to to digest, digest, hot hot in in potency, potency, unctuous unctuous and and sweet, sweet, increases increases urine urine and and semen, semen, strengthening, strengthening, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and increases increases kapha kapha and and pitta. pitta. 61. 61. शीता याद सहाः प न eat महाम ASTMEAY Yet: ु ः ृगा तेषु HeAETaET: Flesh Flesh of of the the mahamrigas mahamrigas (big (big animals) animals) is is cold cold in in potency potency generally; generally; of of them them the the flesh flesh of of carnivorous carnivorous and and prasaha prasaha animals animals have have salt salt as as secondary secondary taste, taste, pungent pungent the the end end of of digestion, digestion, increases increases the the muscles muscles of of body, body, ideally ideally suited suited for for persons persons suffering suffering from from long long standing standing haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, duodenal duodenal diseases diseases and and consumption consumption 62-62 62-62 ½ '2 Aja Aja (goat’s (goat’s meat) meat) ना तशीत ग सम ् आजं anf eres AMA Hot अदोषलम He ् ॥६३॥ 163I ु ि न धं मां शर रधातस यात ् अन भ यि द FEU बं ह RRA Herfawaicg ु ामा Ae ृ णम ् ।| Goat Goat meat meat is is not not very very cold cold in in potency, potency, hard hard to to digest, digest, fatty, fatty, does does not not aggravate aggravate the the doshas, doshas, being being identical identical with with the the doshas doshas of of the the human human body, body, it it is is anabhisyandi anabhisyandi (does (does not not cause cause increases increases of of secretions secretions in in the the tissue tissue channels). channels). It It is is nourishing, nourishing, causes causes weight weight gain. gain. 63. 63. वपर तमतो ेयमा वकं बंहृ णं तु तत ् Avi Avi (meat (meat of of sheep) sheep) is is opposite opposite in in nature nature with with that that of of goat goat and and causes causes weight weight gain. gain. 64 64 श मा CAयिSerन TATA वषम SAL वरपीनसान UPA AAAT ATT ् ु ककास Gomamsa Gomamsa (flesh (flesh of of cow, cow, bull, bull, bullock) bullock) cures cures dry dry cough, cough, exhaustion, exhaustion, excess excess hunger, hunger, intermittent intermittent fevers, fevers, chronic chronic nasal nasal catarrh, catarrh, emaciation, emaciation, and and diseases diseases caused caused by by increase increase of of vata vata independently. independently. 65. 65. उ णो WAY: गर या म हषः FActaeagecdhd व नदा यबह SON ृ वकृत ् Flesh Flesh of of mahisa mahisa (buffalo) (buffalo) is is hot, hot, not not easily easily digestible, digestible, produces produces sleep, sleep, strength strength and and stoutness stoutness of of the the body. body. त व वराहः THE महा Vfalmaerre: चशु बल दः AcgeRNTS: Flesh Flesh of of varaha varaha (pig) (pig) is is similar similar to to that that of of the the buffalo, buffalo, relieves relieves fatigue, fatigue, increases increases taste, taste, semen semen and and strength strength 66 66 म याः परं कफकराः aferdtaeaaad च लचीमि दोषकृत ् ACM: Of aan: Fish Fish is is general general tends tends to to increase increase kapha kapha greatly greatly chilichima chilichima fish fish tends tends to to increase increase all all the the three three dosas. dosas. Page Page No. No. 83 83 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan लावारो हतगोधै रणः Etवे Taवे aah वग aT: वराः परम mana: WL ् Lava, Lava, rohita, rohita, godha godha and and ena-are ena-are best best in in their their respective respective groups. groups. 67 67 मां स योहतं श वय: थं च भजेत A ् यजेत| ् । Aeसं dewled reु ं aaed a ald म कृशं भ या धवा र fatgar वषैह तम ् ॥६८॥ Aeतृ ं He yetशृ ं मेAcsयं cata ec Meat just killed, Meat of of animals animals which which have have been been just killed, which which are are pure pure (uncontaminated) (uncontaminated) and and of of adult adult animals animals only only should should be be used used food; food; Meat Meat of of dead dead animals, animals, of of those those which which very very emaciated, emaciated, which which are are very very fatty, fatty, and and of of those those animals animals which which are are dead dead due due to to diseases, diseases, water water (drowning) (drowning) and and poison poison should should be be rejected. rejected. 68 68 प ंिु योः प व गु णी, afatot ग भणी ग qierat: yaueareh apeु ः ू प चाध speck, लघुय ष चत ु पा सु, वह गेषु पुनः पुमान ् शरः THeAeyory क धो प ृ ठ य क याः स नो च गौरवम RE: Hea: Paeaiteg shay ् तथा वाशययोयथापूव fattest व न दशे त ् aan आमप sarang शोणोत भत न Menawydea PT धात MeycRIRA ू ामु तरो तरम ् ृ ीनां च मांसा गर यो वgHष णमे व AreaegNreat urahacer ese ु म् ृ ृ कयक ृ गद sftत मां Areas: इ सवगः Meat Meat obtained obtained from from the the parts parts above above the the umbilicus umbilicus of of male male animals animals and and from from the the parts parts below below the the umbilicus umbilicus of of female female animals, animals, that that obtained obtained from from the the pregnant pregnant animal animal are are all all hard hard to to digest. digest. Among Among the the quadrupeds, quadrupeds, the the flesh flesh of of females females is is easily easily digestible digestible but but among among the the birds birds it it is is of of the the males. males. Flesh Flesh obtained obtained from from the the head, head, neck, neck, thighs, thighs, back, back, waist waist ,, forelegs, forelegs, stomach stomach and and intestines intestines are are hard hard to to digest digest in in the the reverse reverse order order of of enumeration. enumeration. The The tissues tissues of of the the animals animals such such as as blood blood and and others others are are hard hard to to digest digest in in their their successive successive order; order; testicles, testicles, penis, penis, kidneys, kidneys, liver liver and and rectum rectum are are hard hard to to digest digest than than the the flesh. flesh. 69-71. 69-71. Thus Thus ends ends the the group group of of meat. meat. In In ancient ancient India, India, hunting hunting was was very very common common both both for for the the sake sake of of food food and and as as pastime. pastime. Among Among the the hunted hunted animals animals and and birds birds belonging belonging to to different different kinds kinds and and nature nature some some were were found found suitable suitable as as food food but but some some were were not. not. It It is is difficult difficult to to correctly correctly identify identify some some of of the the animals, animals, birds birds and and fishes fishes named named herein, herein, some some of of them them might might have have become become extinct extinct even. even. Page Page No. No. 84 84 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Shaka Shaka varga varga ::- (group (group of of leafy leafy vegetables) vegetables) अथ He शाकवगः Mpa: शाक पाठाशठ सष णसतीनजम Meh ं TTSTASRAT A eT Het TL ् ू ास ु नषOCT दोष नं लघ ा ह Uses सराज ववा eTतHa Paved ay ु mis ुकम ् Arwen सु नष णो sifsarpaGVeaedy अि नकृ व ृ य तेषु Wears: राज वः WA परम ् e+e 2 यश वकार नः वच भे द त तक evaded: caistie q ु वा ae ु म् Patha Patha (Cissampelos (Cissampelos pareira), pareira), shati shati (Hedychium (Hedychium spicatum), spicatum), susha, susha, sunishanna, sunishanna, satinaja satinaja in in general, general, mitigates mitigates all all the the three three doshas, doshas, are are easily easily digestible digestible and and grahi grahi (absorbent); (absorbent); Sunishanna Sunishanna increases increases hunger hunger and and is is aphrodisiac; aphrodisiac; Rajakshava Rajakshava is is still still better better and and cures cures duodenal duodenal diseases, diseases, haemorrhoids; haemorrhoids; vastuka vastuka breaks breaks up up the the hard hard faceces. faceces. 72-73 72-73 हि त awa दोष afed यं Heo कु ठ gear व ृ या Bor सो णा Taree रसायनी काकमाची सरा वया asso चा गेय ला sfsareroett अि नद पनी Hard GT Faat यश afravesatedison अ नल ले म हतो णा anfeott ा हणी org: लघुः Tevet Kakamachi Kakamachi (Solanum (Solanum nigrum) nigrum) mitigates mitigates the the three three doshas, doshas, useful useful in in skin skin diseases, diseases, is is aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, hot hot in in potency, potency, rejuvenator, rejuvenator, causes causes easy easy movement movement of of faeces, faeces, and and is is good good for for voice. voice. Changeri Changeri (Oxalis (Oxalis corniculata) corniculata) is is sour sour taste, taste, kindles kindles digestion, digestion, good good for for duodenal duodenal diseases, diseases, haemorrhoids haemorrhoids and and for for increased increased vata vata and and kapha; kapha; hot hot in in potency, potency, withholds withholds elimination elimination of of fluids fluids and and is is easily easily digestible. digestible. 74 74 पटोलस तलाAMSAT. र टशा गे टाव गुजा अम acterATM HAT:तृ ाः वे ा बCe हृ तीवासाक ु तल तलप णकाः 2 म डूकपण कक टकारवे लकपपटाः FUSHyvlfHanfeandedhael: नाडीकलायगोिजet वावाताकं ~ope वन त तकमi ् कर कु कं aedl न द Hdo कुचैला श AN रं Hoh eHetteett ुकलादनी कट alte लं began के बुकं शीतं शम ् elt सकोशातककक AHledtHHncneyy त तं पाके कटु ा ह वातलं कफ प तिजत ् Patola, Patola, saptala, saptala, arista arista (neem (neem leaves), leaves), sharngeshta sharngeshta (angaravalli/bharangi), (angaravalli/bharangi), Avalguja Avalguja (Bakuchi), (Bakuchi), amruta amruta (Tinospora), (Tinospora), Vetra Vetra (shoot (shoot of of vetra), vetra), Brhati Brhati (Solanum (Solanum indicum), indicum), vasa vasa (Adhatoda (Adhatoda vasica), vasica), kutill, kutill, tilaparnika tilaparnika (badraka), (badraka), mandukaparni mandukaparni (Gotu (Gotu kola), kola), Karkota, Karkota, karavella karavella (bitter (bitter gourd). gourd). Parpata, Parpata, nadikalaya, nadikalaya, gojihwa gojihwa (godhumi); (godhumi); vartaka vartaka (brhati), (brhati), vanatiktaka vanatiktaka (vatsaka/kutaja), (vatsaka/kutaja), karira, karira, kulaka kulaka (kupila), (kupila), nandi nandi (jaya),kucaila, (jaya),kucaila, sakuladani sakuladani (mesasrngi), (mesasrngi), katilla katilla (raktapunarnava), (raktapunarnava), kebuka kebuka (kembuka),kosataka, (kembuka),kosataka, and and karkasa karkasa (kampilla) (kampilla) all all these these are are cold cold in in potency, potency, bitter bitter in in taste, taste, pungent pungent at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, with with hold hold the the movement movement of of fluids, fluids, increase increase vatta vatta and and mitigate mitigate kapha kapha and and pitta. pitta. 75-78 75-78 पटोलं HAA कृ मनुत ् सवाद च दम|् । eeeयं Velo Targaप ु ाकं vfawer Page Page No. No. 85 85 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Patola Patola is is good good for for the the heart heart (or (or the the mind), mind), useful useful in in worms, worms, sweet sweet at at the the end end of of digestion digestion and and gives gives taste. taste. प तलं द पनं भे द वात नं बहृ ती वयम ् The The two two Brihatis Brihatis (Brihati (Brihati and and Kantakari) Kantakari) increases increases pitta, pitta, promote promote hunger, hunger, breaks breaks the the hard hard faeces. faeces. व मकास नं रwraftcaet त प तहरं परम qsषृ ं तgq ु वatareeet WA ् Vrusha Vrusha (Vasa) (Vasa) cures cures vomiting, vomiting, cough cough and and especially especially so so the the haemorragic haemorragic disease. disease. कारवे लं सकटुकं द पनं कफिज परम ् Karavella Karavella (bitter (bitter gourd) gourd) is is bitter bitter in in taste, taste, kindles kindles digestion digestion and and mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and pitta pitta especially. especially. Brinjal Brinjal benefits: benefits: वाताकं कट त तो णं AY मधुरं HwHaraistd कफवातिजत|् । adie He ु faraleot स अि नजननं Feaयं Veaयं HVeaa अ प तलम ् ॥८१॥ atारं sfeetotetea Ic8 ll Brinjal Brinjal is is pungent, pungent, bitter, bitter, hot hot in in potency, potency, sweet, sweet, mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata, vata, is is slightly slightly alkaline, alkaline, kindles kindles digestion digestion improves improves taste taste and and does does not not aggravate aggravate pitta pitta 81 81 कर रमा मानकरं कषायं वाद ु त तकम ् Karira Karira produces produces distention distention of of the the abdomen, abdomen, is is astringent, astringent, sweet sweet and and bitter bitter in in taste, taste, कोशाताकाव गज दनावि saatat नद पनौ Headed ु कौभेea SS Kosataki Kosataki and and avalguja avalguja break break the the hard hard faeces faeces and and kindle kindle digestion. digestion. 82 82 त डुल यो Tear हमो wal: ः FAGUIALAY वादप aogellar AE: ःु ु ाकरसो लघ मद प त वषा नः म प तिजत ् Hecdlasaed: Arad aad ु जातं वात िferser न धं शीतं वाद ु ब ंहृ णं श oiler ग TSु Fag FEU MHH ु कृ Aपरं Tanduliya Tanduliya is is cold cold in in potency, potency, dry, dry, sweet sweet in in taste taste and and also also at at the the end end of of digestion digestion and and easily easily digestible, digestible, cures cures intoxication, intoxication, pitta, pitta, poison poison and and discovers discovers of of bold; bold; Munjata Munjata mitigates mitigates vata vata and and pitta, pitta, is is unctuous, unctuous, cold cold in in potency, potency, hard hard to to digest, digest, sweet, sweet, makes makes the the body body stout stout and and increases increases semen. semen. 83 83 गव सारा त पाल या Acta मद नी aegaecnt चा युपोदका Tat I ु Westra ु ART WSU IST: FT SISA: पाल याव HAR मत च च ः स त स हणा मकः ु ु ृ Page Page No. No. 86 86 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Palankya Palankya is is hard hard to to digest, digest, and and laxative. laxative. Upodika Upodika (spinach) (spinach) relieves relieves intoxication; intoxication; chanchu chanchu is is similar similar to to palankya palankya and and withholds withholds elimination elimination of of fluids. fluids. 84 84 वदार वात प त नी म वादश faant arattedeett Ager ू ला Targeitctar ु ीतला जीवनी बंह ृ णी क या गव ु व ृ या रसायनम ् च नी जीव हमा Uaु या सवदोष Adelseeht silatती मध Aenुरा ea Vidari Vidari mitigates mitigates vata vata and and pitta, pitta, is is diuretic, diuretic, sweet sweet in in taste, taste, and and cold cold in in potency, potency, prolongs prolongs life life (by (by giving giving strength), strength), makes makes the the body body stout, stout, good good for for the the throat, throat, hard hard to to digest, digest, aphrodisiac aphrodisiac and and rejuvenator. rejuvenator. Jivanti Jivanti is is good good for for the the eyes, eyes, mitigates mitigates all all the the dosas, dosas, is is sweet sweet in in taste taste and and cold cold in in potency. potency. 85-86 85-86 क PavsdesaiersrHnrsaeraesey ू मा डत ु बका ल गककाववा ति डशम ् तथा aygettarenfanke पस कफवातकृत ् aan ु चीनाक चभटं awarcepct भे द fascreaieaieg व ट य भ यि द TAIGHaAa वादप Hic TSु ु ाकरसं ग Kusmanda Kusmanda (ash (ash gourd), gourd), Tumba Tumba (alabu), (alabu), Kalinga, Kalinga, karkaru, karkaru, evaru, evaru, tindisa, tindisa, trapusa, trapusa, cinaka, cinaka, cirbhata—all cirbhata—all cause cause increase increase of of kapha kapha and and vata, vata, breaks breaks the the hard hard faeces, faeces, stays stays long long without without digestion digestion inside inside the the stomach, stomach, causes causes more more secretion secretion in in the the tissues, tissues, sweet sweet in in taste taste and and at at the the end end of of digestion digestion and and not not easily easily digestible. digestible. 87 87 Ash Ash Gourd Gourd Benefits Benefits व ल फलानां TAL वरं HSATS कू मा डं aaah वात प तिजतIce ् ॥८८॥ aecthola बि तशु aa करं वTea ृ यं पुसं cass व तमू लम |् । ATH Ash Ash gourd gourd is is best best among among the the creepers, creepers, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and pitta pitta cleanses cleanses the the urinary urinary bladder, bladder, and and aphrodisiac. aphrodisiac. Trapusa Trapusa causes causes more more urination urination (diuretic). (diuretic). त ara ु बं तरं aie ा ह का ल गैवा चभटम ् varet aifesdtaterasicr, बालं प तहरं शीतं व या प वमतो अ यथा are Teadet ete faaarcrsedaat Heme शीणव स ारं Wedel प तलं कफवातिजत gittged I ु wank Hadise ् ृ तं त रोचनं द पनं यम ठ ला आनाहनु लघु Tumba Tumba (alabu) (alabu) is is very very dry dry (causes (causes dryness), dryness), absorbent; absorbent; kalinga, kalinga, ervaru ervaru and and cirbhita cirbhita when when tender tender mitigate mitigate pitta pitta and and are are cold cold in in potency, potency, but but when when ripe ripe are are opposite opposite in in qualities, qualities, these these which which are are overripe overripe and and separated separated from from its its attachment, attachment, will will be be alkaline alkaline in in taste, taste, increase increase pitta, pitta, mitigate mitigate kapha, kapha, and and vata, vata, improves improves taste taste and and appetite, appetite, good good for for the the heart, heart, cures cures enlargement enlargement of of the the prostate, prostate, distention distention of of abdomen abdomen and and easily easily digestible. digestible. 89-90 89-90 Page Page No. No. 87 87 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan मण बसशालoP पलक GHA दक HUTCH pAal ूकक ु मुदोAah ु म् ृ ाल IAM न द माषकक गाटककसे कम AeA heे लटू श YSMEHHAEHA, ् ृ ौ जादनं कलो ा ह fea हमं ग plrclest Holgaयं च UT wat ं aie aSु Mrinala Mrinala (lotus (lotus stalk), stalk), bias bias (lotus (lotus root), root), saluki saluki (lotus (lotus tuber), tuber), kumuda kumuda (utpala (utpala kanda), kanda), nandi, nandi, mashaka, mashaka, keluta, keluta, srngataka, srngataka, kaseruka, kaseruka, kranucadana kranucadana and and kalodya kalodya are are dry dry (cause (cause dryness). dryness). Water Water absorbent, absorbent, cold cold in in potency potency and and hot hot easily easily digestible. digestible. 91-92 91-92 कल बना लकामाषकु ट जरकुतु बकम ् च ल ल वाकलोणीकाकु टकवेधक ु म् जीव तझ ु rdsHoapg वे डकजयवशाकसुव चलाः Hardee arden: आल क ा न च सवा ण तथा स न ल णम ् BeoHet TP AAT AAT AAT AAT ु ू याfey वाद ु Hal ं सलवणं वात ले मकरं गु FAG, AAA ATAVATH AL aS शीतलम स ृ ट व मू ं oral ायो faves व ट य जीय eral ् Ysefavas strateत ि व नं न पी डतरसं नेहा यं ना तदोषलम ् Kalamba, Kalamba, Nalika Nalika —– (kapotacarana), (kapotacarana), marsa, marsa, kutinjara, kutinjara, kutumbaka, kutumbaka, cilli cilli (vastuka), (vastuka), latvaka, latvaka, lonika, lonika, karutaka, jivanta, jhun jhun jhu, jhu, edagaja, karutaka, gavedhuka, gavedhuka, jivanta, edagaja, yavasaka yavasaka (yavanisaka), (yavanisaka), suvarchala suvarchala and and aluka aluka of of different different kinds, kinds, leaves leaves of of legumes legumes used used for for soup soup and and of of laksmana laksmana are are all all sweet, sweet, slightly slightly dry, dry, salty, salty, increases increases vata vata and and kapha, kapha, not not easily easily digestible digestible cold cold in in potency, potency, help help elimination elimination of of urine urine and and faeces, juice taken faeces, stay stay long long in in the the stomach stomach for for digestion; digestion; if if cooked cooked in in steam, steam, juice taken out out and and mixed mixed with with oils, oils, they they will will not not cause cause much much aggravation aggravation of of the the dosas dosas 93-95 93-95 लघ प ा तJd ु या ल सा वा तक ag ु wart a च deena aSIeaal Ac ु समा मता Cilli, Cilli, which which has has small small leaves leaves is is similar similar (in (in property) property) with with vastuka. vastuka. 96 96 तकार व णं वाद ु स त तं कफवातिजत ् वषा asisdtवौ कालशाक prea ं oच स ारं कट Fat agit, ु त तकम ् द पनं भेदनं हि त गरशोफकफा नलान ् Tarkari Tarkari and and varuna varuna are are sweet sweet and and slightly slightly better better and and mitigate mitigate kapha kapha and and vata. vata. The The two two kinds kinds of of varsabhu varsabhu and and kalasaka kalasaka are are slightly slightly alkaline, alkaline, pungent pungent and and bitter, bitter, improve improve digestion, digestion, break break the the hard hard faeces faeces and and cure cure artificial artificial poisoning, poisoning, dropsy, dropsy, kapha kapha and and vata. vata. 97 97 द पनाः कफवात नाि च रAव CASH: वा कुराः सराः Ae: HHATCEAAR ART: शतावय त ता व दोष यापहाः Maas कुरिSAFA FSA ृ या STTAATTBT: The The tender tender sprouts sprouts of of cirabilva cirabilva increase increase appetite, appetite, mitigate mitigate kapha kapha and and vata vata and and cause cause movement movement of of bowels; bowels; sprouts sprouts of of satavari satavari are are bitter, bitter, aphrodisiac aphrodisiac and and mitigate mitigate the the three three dosas dosas 98. 98. wal ो aerated arated: वंशकर र तु Taare वदाह वात प तलः Page Page No. No. 88 88 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Vamsakarira Vamsakarira (tender (tender shoots shoots of of bamboo) bamboo) causes causes dryness dryness inside, inside, heartburn heartburn and and increase increase of of vata vata and and pitta. pitta. 99 99 Tet arraitaera: aparatsrd ् प तूरो द पनि त तः collet: ल हाशः कफवातिजत Pattura Pattura kindles kindles digestion, digestion, is is bitter, bitter, cures cures enlargement enlargement of of spleen, spleen, haemorrhoids haemorrhoids and and mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata. vata. 99 99 ½ '4 क सरः pinarraalerccrl Beal जये AACA: ृ मकासकफो लेदान ् कासमद Kasamarda Kasamarda cures cures disease disease caused caused by by worms, worms, cough cough and and increase increase of of kapha kapha and and moves moves the the bowels. bowels. ो णम लं कौस प तकरं सरम wares phyret weु cde aA ् ु भं ग Kousumbha Kousumbha is is dry, dry, hot hot in in potency, potency, sour, sour, hard hard to to digest digest increase increase pitta pitta and and makes makes the the bowels bowels to to move. move. गु णं साषपं ब व मू ं सवदोषकृत ् Sarsapa Sarsapa (mustard) (mustard) is is not not easily easily digestible, digestible, hot hot in in potency, potency, binds binds the the faeces faeces and and urine urine and and causes causes increase increase of of all all the the dosas. dosas. Mulaka Mulaka (radish), (radish), when when tender tender and and not not having having definite definite taste, taste, is is slightly slightly alkaline alkaline and and better, better, mitigates mitigates the the dosas, dosas, easily easily digestible digestible hot hot in in potency, potency, and and cures cures abdominal abdominal tumours, tumours, cough, cough, asthma, asthma, ulcers, ulcers, disease disease of of he he eye eye and and throat, throat, horseness horseness of of voice, voice, asthma, asthma, upward upward movement movement inside inside the the abdomen abdomen (reverse (reverse peristalsis) peristalsis) and and chronic chronic nasal nasal catarrh. catarrh. 102-103. 102-103. Radish Radish benefits: benefits: य बालं अ य तरसं Tiss कि जत ् AXारं स त तकम ् Feast Heararas AiaraHA त मूलकं दोषहरं लघु सो णं नय छ त गु मकास वास णने Te AP AAT य ALATA AATगलामयान MATL, ् वराि oTaTe नसादोदावतपीनसां FRI Tea HAA FECT: मह पुनः च रसे पाके च Tah a कट Henry ु कमु णवीय दोषकृत ् Palyepd ग व न ध स ं तद Waaien a िSasase aaryप वातिजत areas ् ु भ यि द च वात ले महरं श AAA US UGH ् आमं STA त J ु दोषलम ayaa ् ु कं सवम Radish Radish that that is is tender, tender, and and not not having having definite definite tatste, tatste, is is slightly slightly alkaline alkaline and and bitter, bitter, balances balances Doshas, Doshas, easy easy to to digest, digest, hot hot in in potency potency and and cures cures abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, cough, cough, respiratory respiratory conditions, conditions, ulcers, ulcers, diseases diseases of of eye eye and and throat, throat, hoarseness hoarseness of of voice, voice, bloating, bloating, and and rhinitis. rhinitis. Radish, Radish, big big in in size size is is hard hard to to digest, digest, pungent pungent in in taste taste and and at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, not not in in potency, potency, increases increases all all the the three three doshas, doshas, hard hard to to digest digest and and is is abhishynadi abhishynadi (indigestion (indigestion plus plus sticky sticky to to the the gut). gut). When When cooked cooked with with fats fats it it mitigates mitigates vata; vata; the the dried dried one one causes causes increase increase of of the the dosha. dosha. 104. 104. Page Page No. No. 89 89 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan HOON Atetel TUste|: कट प डालुः cctatler: प तवधनः ू णो वातकफहा Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Pindalu Pindalu is is pungent, pungent, hot hot in in potency, potency, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and kapha kapha but but increase increase pitta. pitta. 105 105 कुठे र श स रससुमुखासु रभू तTAL ण POMP ु ुATARI ृ म् फ णजा जकज भीर भ ृAत AS ा ह शालनम PV SASAPAFATT Worry ् 2 8 29 22 orf aE F वदा ह कटु . ो णं 2 NO + : 2 1 दयं द पनरोचनम ् कशु कृAgehevt म ु ती णं दोषो लेशकरं लघ cay AFM AL ु Kuthera, jambira, etc. Kuthera, sigru sigru (drum (drum stick), stick), surasa, surasa, sumuka, sumuka, asuri, asuri, bhutrna, bhutrna, phanijjia, phanijjia, arjaka, arjaka, jambira, etc. when when green green are are water water absorbent, absorbent, cause cause burning burning sensation sensation during during digestion, digestion, pungent, pungent, cause cause dryness, dryness, hot hot in in potency, potency, good good for for the the heart heart (or (or the the mind), mind), kindles kindles hunger hunger and and taste, taste, destroy destroy vision, vision, semen semen and and worms worms (intestinal (intestinal parasites), parasites), penetrates penetrates deep, deep, cause cause slight slight increase increase of of the the dosas dosas and and are are easily easily digestible digestible 106-107. 106-107. Holy Holy basil basil benefits benefits ह मा are कास fay वष are वास पा व क् प fecar uiedep Yfceteuer ू तग धहा ।| स त वदाह गरशोफहा RE: TAS arfafaare AVNET ॥१०८॥ I18<I ुरस: स ुमुखो ना Surasa Surasa (Tulasi (Tulasi —– Holy Holy Basil) Basil) cures cures hiccup, hiccup, cough, cough, poison, poison, asthma, asthma, pain pain in in the the flanks flanks and and bad bad breath. breath. Sumukha Sumukha does does not not cause cause much much burning burning sensation, sensation, cures cures artifial artifial (homicidal) (homicidal) poison poison and and dropsy. dropsy. 107 107 आ का forcaen त तमधुरा Fae मू ला aन aच पcca तकृत ् aifgat Ardrika Ardrika (coriander) (coriander) is is bitter bitter and and sweet sweet in in taste, taste, diuretic diuretic and and does does not not increase increase pitta. pitta. Garlic Garlic benefits: benefits: लश श Aeुनो भ Heavier: HEUTAHLCA: AX: १०९ 808 ु पाकरसः सरः ृ ती णो णः कट े यो ग न धो Weera रोचनदrae: पनः Fea:यः क Heat Tequy: ु व ृ यः िReset भ नास MAapeIow धानकृ ब यो CEA र त IedIgIT: प त दष TA eo ू णः ११० कलासकु oaleaneltae ठगु माश मे हte Ach मकफा Pros Hiteनलान oleT ् स ह मापीनस वासकासान ACHAT HRA ् हि Seadत रसायनम TATA ् १११ 888 S S ~ Lashuna Lashuna (garlic) (garlic) is is highly highly penetrating penetrating (deep (deep into into the the tissues), tissues), hot hot in in potency, potency, pungent pungent in in taste, taste, and and at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, makes makes the the bowles bowles to to move, move, good good for for the the heart heart (or (or the the mind), mind), and and hairs; hairs; hard hard to to digest, digest, aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, unctuous, unctuous, improves improves taste taste and and digestion, digestion, helps helps union union of of features, features, gives gives strength, strength, greatly greatly vitiates vitiates the the blood blood and and pitta, pitta, cures cures leucoderma, leucoderma, skin skin diseases, diseases, abdominal abdominal Page Page No. No. 90 90 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan tumours, tumours, heamorrhoids, heamorrhoids, diabetes, diabetes, worms, worms, diseases diseases caused caused by by kapha kapha and and vata, vata, hiccup, hiccup, chronic chronic nasal nasal catarrh catarrh ,, asthma asthma and and cough. cough. It It is is aa rejuvenator rejuvenator of of the the body.109-111 body.109-111 पला डु ता गुण यूनः TASTY: ले मलो ना त प तलः VSS afer: Palandu Palandu (onion) (onion) is is inferior inferior in in the the above above qualities, qualities, increases increases of of pitta. pitta. 111 111 ½ 4 कफवाताशसां वे दे अ यवहतौ तथा Haare पWa:यः Fae 33s oaedt a4 Aeonणो ग aSotetHt a: ती ा ह fcc पि तनां eatpect हतकृ न सः ु जनको aie Grinjanaka Grinjanaka (carrot) (carrot) is is best best suitable suitable to to persons persons suffering suffering from from haemorrhoids haemorrhoids of of kapha kapha Vata Vata origin, origin, for for fomenting fomenting (the (the pile pile masses) masses) and and eating; eating; it it is is penetrating, penetrating, water water absorbent absorbent and and not not suitable suitable to to those those who who have have pitta pitta predominance. predominance. 112 112 द पनः स रू णो SIT: चयः कफ नो faerel वशदो लघ वशेषादशसां प aloe: GUM atheatl oy: ःु faersrekrat Ga:यः भ sheraecdiaarsa: ूक द व तदोषलः Surana Surana (Yam) (Yam) kindles kindles digestion, digestion, improves improves taste, taste, mitigates mitigates kapha kapha is is non-unctous, non-unctous, easily easily digestible digestible and and especially especially good good for for haemorrhoids; haemorrhoids; bhukanda bhukanda causes causes increase increase of of all all the the dosas dosas to to aa great great extent extent .113 .113 प फले ae नाले Hed क दे चUT WSAT ग ु ता TI े पUST ु पे Het मात ् HAT बस शाक जीव ती ass साषपं caat ववरं परम TH Meyे षु sided WA ् इ त शाकवगः sfa enact: Leaves, Leaves, flowers, flowers, fruits fruits (unripe), (unripe), tubular tubular leaves leaves and and tubers tubers are are heavy heavy (not (not easily easily digestible digestible in in their their successive jivanti is successive order; order; jivanti is the the best best and and sarshapa sarshapa (mustard) (mustard) is is the the worst worst among among the the leafy leafy vegetables. vegetables. 114. 114. Thus Thus ends ends the the group group of of vegetables. vegetables. Notes:Notes:- different different kinds kinds of of vegetables vegetables have have been been described described in in these these verses, verses, some some of of them them are are recognizable recognizable now now while while some some others others are are not, not, some some of of them them were were in in use use in in olden olden days days but but not not so so now-a-days, now-a-days, many many are are available available only only in in forests forests and and fields fields while while some some others others are are cultivated. cultivated. Page Page No. No. 91 91 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Phala Phala vrgavrga- (group (group of of fruits):fruits):Grapes Grapes benefits: benefits: अथ 3 फलवगः erat: फलो तमा Gal व ृ या च ु या |e स ृ टमू fae व ११५ alaा ा Welleda Taysal °24 वादप ि न धा AIA सकषाया WAT हमा ae: गु ः Tagua ु ाकरसा FeaseT नह य TAA नल प ता AFACACTHCTUTET त ता य वमदा ययान ् ११६ Porgrca 8 PE त ृ THAT णकास ALATA म वासEAवरभे दaT त AAT यान ATT, ् Draksa Draksa (grapes) (grapes) is is best best among among fruits, fruits, is is aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, good good for for the the eyes, eyes, helps helps elimination elimination of of urine urine and and faeces, faeces, sweet sweet in in taste taste and and the the end end of of digestion, digestion, unctous, unctous, slightly slightly astringent, astringent, cold cold potency, potency, hard hard to to digest, digest, cures cures diseases diseases of of vata, vata, pitta pitta and and rakta; rakta; better better taste taste in in the the mouth, mouth, intoxication, intoxication, thirst, thirst, cough, cough, fever, fever, respiratory respiratory conditions, conditions, hoarseness, hoarseness, injury injury to to the the lungs lungs and and chronic chronic respiratory respiratory diseases. diseases. 115-116 115-116 ½ '% Dadima Dadima —– (Pomegranate) (Pomegranate) उ त प ता जय त Aras ी दोषान ्Fag वाद ु asa दा डमम ् ¢११७ SerAcasaAe eo प ता वरो ध ना यु णम लं aaa वातकफापहम Pca AGUAS Hea ् सव eed दयं oe लघु िeareer न धं mie ा ह रोचन द पनम ् ११८ ua treet alot eee It It mitigates mitigates the the greatly greatly increased increased pitta pitta in in particular particular and and the the other other doss doss also also and and is is sweet; sweet; the the sour sour variety variety is is also also not not going going to to increase increase pitta, pitta, not not very very hot hot in in potency potency and and mitigates mitigates vata vata and and kapha. kapha. All All varieties varieties of of Pomegranate Pomegranate are are good good to to the the hear, hear, easily easily digestible digestible unctuous, unctuous, without without elimination elimination of of fluids, fluids, stimulate stimulate appetite appetite and and digestion. digestion. 117-118 117-118 मोचखज े लप षकम1 ् ATTRA TA रकATRIA N ूरपनसना आ ाततालका मयराजादनमध STATAT APR K ूकजम1 ् सौवीरबदरा वमL ् HARARTSHAH TH RIA ु ले मातको 2 कोलफoTगJS LASAT वातामा नकोचकमs ् ATTATaभशLTaenransAherch ुका ोडमoNक ु ू लकfelch उ माणं SeAToT यालं च ंहृ णं ग Hare UT बEur aeु शीतलम elas ् दाह त यहरं TA र त पaa त सादनम GSaTARTARL aT ् वादप न धं faseiear व टि भ कफश Fagan awerpp ु ाकरसं िfears ु कृत ् Mocha Mocha (plantain), (plantain), kharjura kharjura (dates) (dates) panasa panasa (jack (jack fruits) fruits) narikela narikela (cocoanut (cocoanut )) parusaka parusaka amrataka amrataka ,, tala, tala, kasmarya, kasmarya, rajadana, rajadana, madhuka, madhuka, badara, badara, ankola, ankola, phalgu, phalgu, slesmataka, slesmataka, vatama, vatama, abhisuka, abhisuka, aksoda, aksoda, mukulaka, mukulaka, nikocaka, nikocaka, urumanam, urumanam, and and priyala priyala make make the the body body stout, stout, not not easily easily digestible digestible cold cold in in potency, potency, relive relive burning burning sensation sensation ,, injury injury to to the the lungs, lungs, consumption, consumption, bleeding bleeding conditions, conditions, sweet sweet in in taste taste and and also also at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, unctous, unctous, stay stay long long in in the the stomach stomach without without digestion, digestion, increase increase kapha kapha and and semen. semen. 119-121 119-121 ½ % Page Page No. No. 92 92 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan फलं प तलं तालं मयजं AA हमम ् thet तJ ु Picco Ae सरं A का HVAT Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan शक े यं मे WprAddetest ALY ACYयं रसायनम TATA ् ृ मू वब ध नं क Fruit Fruit of of Tala Tala —– Borassus Borassus flabellifera flabellifera increases increases pitta, pitta, moves moves the the bowels. bowels. Fruits Fruits of of kasmarya kasmarya is is cold cold in in potency, potency, relives relives the the obstruction obstruction of of faeces faeces and and urine, urine, good good for for the the hairs, hairs, increases increases intelligence intelligence and and is is aa rejuvenator. rejuvenator. 122 122 वातामा यु णवीय त ु कफ प तकरं सरम ् Vaataama Vaataama etc. etc. are are hot hot in in potency potency increase increase kapha kapha and and pitta, pitta, are are axative. axative. 123. 123. परम aaet ि न धमनु णं त यालजम ् RA gq ु ares ् वातहरं Rasereser यालम जा मध व ृ यः frenBrenae: प ता नलापहः PaaasoT ALRुरो GSE: Priyala Priyala (Buchanania (Buchanania lanzan) lanzan) mitigates mitigates vata vata effectively, effectively, is is unctous, unctous, cold cold in in potency; potency; its its marrow marrow is is sweet, sweet, aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, mitigates mitigates pitta pitta and and vata, vata, कोलम जा WWhracieesie: ग ुणै त व त ृ छ दः Heafsed कासिज च a: सः altace Kola Kola majja majja (fleshy (fleshy part part of of the the kola) kola) is is similar similar (in (in properties properties with with priyala priyala majja majja )) relieves relieves thirst, thirst, vomiting vomiting and and cough. cough. 124. 124. प वं सद ु ज ु रं व वं दोषलं पू तमा तम ् द पनं Hidde कफवात नं Mel, बालं, MEYAS ा युमयं चDT Ad तत ् adel Bilva Bilva phala phala (bael (bael fruit) fruit) when when ripe ripe is is hard hard to to digest, digest, aggravates aggravates the the doshas doshas and and causes causes flatus; flatus; unripe unripe fruit fruit kindles kindles digestion, digestion, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and kapha; kapha; both both are are water water absorbant. absorbant. 125 125 क प थमामं क ठ नं दोषलं , दोषघा त तु प वं हधमावमथुिजत ्, सव ा ह वषापहम ् Amakapittha Amakapittha (unripe (unripe Kapittha) Kapittha) is is bad bad to to the the throat, throat, and and increases increases the the three three doshas. doshas. Ripe Ripe fruit fruit mitigates mitigates the the dosas, dosas, relives relives hiccup hiccup ad ad vomiting, vomiting, both both are are water water absorbent absorbent and and antipoisonus antipoisonus .126 .126 जा भवं ग oTFad aeु व टि भ शीतलं श fasetear efictel भ aerator ृ वातलम ् स ाह म प तिजत ् asale Farparaved awpficdtstd ू शकृ तोरक यं कफ Jambava Jambava (Jamun (Jamun fruit) fruit) is is not not easily easily digestible, digestible, stays stays long long inside inside the the stomach, stomach, cold cold in in potency, potency, causes causes aggravation aggravation of of vata vata especially, especially, absorbs absorbs moisture moisture from from urine urine and and faeces, faeces, bad bad for for throat throat and and mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and pitta pitta 127 127 वात पtecता UPS कृ बालं थकफ पec तक a, , ब TG ाि Sapp bt ृत् alc ग व प वं Tae adtacied ु ा ं वातिज वा व लं Hw कफशshhT Caedet ु कृत ् Page Page No. No. 93 93 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Bala Bala amra amra (tender (tender unripe unripe mango) mango) increases increases Vata, Vata, Rakta Rakta (blood) (blood) and and pitta; pitta; when when its its seed seed is is fully fully formed, formed, it it increases increases Kapha Kapha and and Pitta; Pitta; when when it it is is ripe ripe it it is is not not easily easily digestible, digestible, mitigates mitigates vata, vata, increases increases kapha kapha and and semen. semen. 128 128 व qaneet ृ ा लं ो णं aa वात Usा ह KANT ले महरं AY लघु Vrksamla Vrksamla (Garcinia (Garcinia fruits) fruits) is is absorbent, absorbent, dry, dry, hot hot in in potency, potency, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and kapha kapha and and easily easily digestible digestible 129. 129. श े श नं IAया ग TROT HET ु णं क Hay ं Samya Samya (fruit (fruit of of sami) sami) is is not not easily easily digestible, digestible, hot hot in in potency, potency, destroys destroys the the hairs hairs and and causes causes dryness. dryness. पील प तलम ् Gel ु Jतु Pcctorey araldet भे Hieद cote: PAA कफवातहरं ल हाशः क ृ मग ु मनुत ् स त तं वाद ु य पीलु ना यु णं त दोषिजत ् Pilu Pilu increases increases pitta, pitta, mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata, vata, is is purgative, purgative, cures cures diseases diseases of of the the spleen, spleen, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, worms, worms, abdominal abdominal tumors; tumors; that that variety variety of of pilu pilu which which has has bitterbitter- sweet sweet taste taste is is not not very very hot hot in in potency potency and and mitigates mitigates all all three three dosas dosas 130 130 वि त तकटुका ि न धा मातल ु ु ग य वातिजत ् GE ARN ATATA Te बंहृ णं मधुरं मांसं वात प तहरं गु लघ केसरं कास वासSCAT ह मामदा ययान ् AY ु तAche PALA Aa aa FIERA आ यशोषाera नल VerwA ले मasec वब ध eH छ ATयरोचकानAHT ् ग म दाि न वं च THUY: enter T नाशये ae त ् ु मोदराशः श ूला न Aeasetcd The The skin skin of of matulunga matulunga (bigger (bigger variety variety of of lemon) lemon) fruit fruit is is better, better, pungent pungent and and unctous, unctous, mitigates mitigates vata; vata; its its fleshy fleshy part part makes makes the the body body stout, stout, is is sweet sweet in in taste, taste, mitigates mitigates vata vata and and pitta pitta and and not not easily easily digestible digestible its its tendril tendril is is easily easily digestible digestible cures cures cough, cough, asthma, asthma, hiccup, hiccup, alchoholic alchoholic intoxication intoxication dryness dryness of of the the mouth, mouth, disorders disorders of of vata vata and and kapha, kapha, constipation, constipation, vomiting, vomiting, loss loss of of taste, taste, abdominal abdominal tumor, tumor, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen, abdomen, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, colic colic and and dyspepsia dyspepsia 131-133 131-133 भ लातक य तव मांसंबंहृ णं वाद ु शीतलम ् तद यि नसमं ACA मे यं कफवातहरं aera Hthgdet परम WH ् Bhallataka Bhallataka (marking (marking nut) nut) The The outer outer rind rind and and fleshy fleshy part part of of bhallataka bhallataka fruit fruit makes makes the the body body stout, just like stout, sweet sweet in in taste, taste, cold cold in in potency; potency; its its seed seed is is just like fire fire in in properties, properties, increases increases intelligence intelligence and and effectively effectively mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata. vata. 134 134 वा व ल शीतम Farearea olay ु णं aच afar वधा welad पालेवतं Te गु यम यि न शमनम BcaAcAfeat WAT ् Page Page No. No. 94 94 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Palevata Palevata fruit fruit of of sweet sweet taste taste is is cold cold in in potency, potency, while while that that of of sour sour taste taste is is hot, hot, both both are are hard hard to to digest, digest, improve improve taste taste and and cure cure diseases diseases due due to to excess excess digestive digestive activity. activity. 134 134 ½ 4 मधुरमा कम ् VAयं AARP प वमाशु SRT जरां Ae या त ATTA ना यु णगSANT TFTA oT ् ु दोषलम Aruka Aruka fruit fruit improve improve taste taste and and is is sweet; sweet; ripe ripe under under goes goes digestion digestion quickly, quickly, not not very very hot hot in in potency, potency, sometimes sometimes hard hard to to digest digest and and increases increases the the dosas dosas 135. 135. ा ाप षकं TAS चा म लं PeaHnyast प तकफ दम ् TMANTSI ग वात नं BL सरं WRC सकरमदकम ् TROOTAS ु णवीय arrest Draksa Draksa (grapes) (grapes) and and parusaka parusaka and and karamardaka, karamardaka, in in their their green green state state are are sour, sour, increase increase pitta pitta and and kapha, kapha, hard hard to to digest, digest, hot hot in in potency, potency, mitigate mitigate vata vata and and laxative. laxative. 136 136 तथा धुलकुचा AT ातका कम ् aM अ Faलं कोलकक lieth ARIOHAL ऐरावतं तशढं सत ग Wad दseas Adeूदं म AarfeosHy ृ लि डकम ् ना त प तकरं प करमदकम ् aMacdat Tedवं शU8ु कं चTACHA Kola, Kola, karkandhu, karkandhu, lakuca, lakuca, amrataka, amrataka, aruka, aruka, airavata, airavata, dantasatha, dantasatha, satuda, satuda, mrigalindikamrigalindika- all all are are sour sour and and do do not not aggravate aggravate pitta pitta greatly; greatly; so so also, also, karamardaka karamardaka fruit fruit ripended ripended and and dried dried does does not not cause cause great great increase increase of of pitta pitta 9causes 9causes mild mild increase). increase). 137137- 138 138 द पनं Naat भेदनं श फलम ् aaet HAHA: ु कम ल काकोलयोः Herz Tonsaraaeoe त लि व टं HATTA: कफवातयोः ृ णा म लम छे द AeAsSS Fruits Fruits of of amlika amlika and and kola kola improve improve digestion, digestion, cause cause purgation, purgation, cures cures thirst, thirst, fatigue, fatigue, exhaustion; exhaustion; are are easily easily digestible digestible and and mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata. vata. 139 139 फलानामवरं त लकुचं सवदोषकृत ् इ त Heras: फलवगः sia Lakuca Lakuca phala phala is is least least among among all all the the fruits fruits and and increases increases all all the the above above the the dosas. dosas. Thus Thus ends ends the the group group of of fruits. fruits. Page Page No. No. 95 95 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Varjya Varjya (qualities (qualities of of food food articles articles that that are are worth worth rejecting):rejecting):हमानलो णदATA व याललालाPag दद ू षतम ् ु ाताCATA FeATeTATSOTg ज तज म नमभAAAI Feds Tel Asta ु ु टं जले ू मजमनातवम ् अ यधा ययुतं ह नवीय जीणतया HIUMAMYS seaaes sitaar अ sfत च 7 धा ये जे तथा शाक स मकोमलम ् esयं Aad Wh ं Kaen अस जातरसं त व छु कं चा IRSA ACIS Tessय म Aerhd ूलकात ् फलम येवं ae तथा 3a आमं feeaatstat ब वविजतम ् oRायेण weaAcad Grains Grains which which have have been been spoiled spoiled by by forest, forest, heavy heavy breeze, breeze, hot hot sunlight, sunlight, polluted polluted air air ,, and and saliva saliva of of snake snake and and other other reptiles; reptiles; which which are are infested infested with with worms, worms, which which have have remained remained under under water water for for long long time, time, not not grown grown in in the the field field meant meant for for it it (in (in fields fields meant meant for for other other kinds kinds of of grain) grain) ,, which which are are unseasonal, unseasonal, mixed mixed with with other other grains, grains, and and which which have have lost lost their their properties properties having having become become very very oldold- should should be be rejected. rejected. Similarly Similarly also also with with the the vegetables, vegetables, the the dishes dishes prepared prepared from from them them without without addition addition of of material material 9oil Soil or or ghree), ghree), which which are are very very hard hard even even after after cooking, cooking, should should be be avoided. avoided. Tender Tender vegetables vegetables which which have have not not developed developed their their normal normal taste taste and and which which have have become become dry dry should should not not be be used used except except amabilwa amabilwa (unripe (unripe bael bael fruit) fruit) Ausadha Ausadha varga varga (group (group of of medicinal medicinal subsances/herbs) subsances/herbs) Salts: Salts: अथौषध areitver वगः at: व यि द Aaut लवणं Ud सव स fasaieg YH Agदृ ु १४३ ey3 ू मं Yel ु टमलं म वात णो णं Wet रोचनं Hw कफ प तकृत ् aterनं पाक OAT ती Hever icdHd All All types types of of salts salts are are vishyandi vishyandi (produce (produce more more secretions secretions in in the the tissues) tissues) suksma suksma (enter (enter into into minute minute pores) pores) help help soft/easy soft/easy movement movement of of faeces, faeces, mitigate mitigate vata, vata, help help digestion, digestion, are are penetrating penetrating ,, aggravate aggravate kapha kapha and and pitta. pitta. 143 143 Among Among them, them, सैधवं at त Aeag स वाद ु FS व ृ यं ead दयं alse दोषनुत ् १४४ aud eyy ल वनु OT णं TM: शः प यम वदाeaयिeaAC नद IAA, पनम ् HEAL TAMA saindhava saindhava salt salt (rock (rock salt) salt) is is slightly slightly sweet, sweet, aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, good good for for the the heart heart (or (or mind), mind), mitigates mitigates all all the the three three doshas, doshas, easily easily digestible digestible not not hot hot in in potency, potency, good good for for health, health, does does not not cause cause burning burning digestion digestion and and kindles kindles digestion digestion 144 144 Page Page No. No. 96 96 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan लघु lade सौवचलं gaa दयं सुग WareeyesNMTAH यु गारशोधनम ् १४५ ay wys कटुपाकं वब ध नं द पनीयं च दम ् Sauvarcala(sochal Sauvarcala(sochal salt) salt) is is easily easily digestible digestible good good for for the the heart heart (or (or mind) mind) ,, possesses possesses good good smell, smell, purifies purifies belching, belching, pungent pungent at at the the end end of of digestion digestion ,, relives relives constipation, constipation, kindles kindles digestion digestion and and gives gives taste. taste. 145 145 Bea: Cet eve ऊ वाधः HAA कफवातानल ोमनं द पनं FAS बडम ् १४६ ु AHA वब tele धानाहTaser व ट sels भशूल गौरवनाशनम fase area ge ् Bida Bida salt salt produces produces both both upward upward and and downward downward movement movement of of kapha kapha and and vata, vata, kindles kindles digestion, digestion, cures cures constipation, constipation, flatulence, flatulence, obstruction, obstruction, of of flatus, flatus, colic colic and and heaviness heaviness (of (of the the abdomen). abdomen). 146 146 facie वपाके Taig वाद ु AAS सामु ं We गु velsr ले म Frater ववधनम ् Samudra Samudra (common (common salt) salt) is is sweet sweet at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, not not easily easily digestible digestible and and aggravates aggravates kapha.147. kapha. 147. स त तकटुक ारं devrtchic ती णमु के द alee चौ दम ् UidedncHant Aubdhida Aubdhida is is slightly slightly bitter, bitter, pungent pungent and and alkaline alkaline in in taste, taste, penetrates penetrates deep deep and and increases increases the the secretions. secretions. pot gladeुणा लवणे wav seta fst: क ग धविजताः ृ णे सौवचलग Krisna Krisna lavana lavana (black (black salt) salt) has has properties properties similar similar to to souvarcala souvarcala except except the the smell. smell. 148 148 ts ay रोमकं लघु Romaka Romaka is is easily easily digestible; digestible; पां सू थं Aa स ारं LISA ले मलं ग TCA ISु Pamsuttha Pamsuttha is is slightly slightly alkaline, alkaline, aggravates aggravates kapha kapha and and not not easilt easilt digestible. digestible. योगे त सै धवा द vats योजयेत ् sauna vant gq ु aewarte लवणानां Whenever Whenever lavanas lavanas (salt) (salt) are are to to be be used used (for (for medicinal medicinal recipes) recipes) they they should should be be prepared prepared commencing commencing with with saindhava. saindhava. ग ड हानाहगलामयान TerAS TSVNATU TAMA eT ् ु म हणीपा Sto ु ल Slale 2 2 CERT: HHHALAच शमये MAAETAYaM: वासाशः कफकासां यवशक ू जाः Page Page No. No. 97 97 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Yavakshara Yavakshara -- (Kshara (Kshara prepared prepared from from barley) barley) mitigates mitigates abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, diseases diseases of of the the heart, heart, duodenal duodenal disease, disease, anaemia, anaemia, splenic splenic disorders, disorders, distension distension of of the the abdomen, abdomen, diseases diseases of of the the throat, throat, asthma, asthma, haemorrhoids haemorrhoids and and cough cough arising arising from from kapha. kapha. 150 150 Kshara Kshara -परमं ती णो ण: क a:ार: सव Favaच Wa clever: pAtsatecag: ृ मिज लघु: ।| प तासग दष वदारण: ॥१५१॥ TCA UT छेSesय Eaalयो TaERer: 11258I ू ण: पाक ृ ् GIT: अप े शच ुषाम|् । HUA:य: कट HEAT estat: Heraagsry ु लाव यात ् श ु ौज: क All All ksharas ksharas are are very very Teekshna Teekshna – — penetrating penetrating ;; ushna ushna —– very very hot hot in in potency, potency, krumijit krumijit – — destroy destroy worms worms Laghu easily digestible Laghu —–easily digestible Pitta vitiate pitta Pitta Asruk Asruk dushana dushana – — vitiate pitta and and blood blood Paki helps in Paki —–helps in digestion, digestion, causes causes healing healing of of wounds wounds Chedya Chedya -- help help break break up up hard hard masses, masses, ahrudya ahrudya not not good good for for the the heart, heart, punctures punctures the the tissues; tissues; being being pungent pungent and and salty salty in in taste taste are are not not good good to to semen, semen, ojas ojas (essence (essence of of the the tissues tissues ), ), hairs hairs and and eye eye (vision) (vision) 151 151 ह गु AAS वातकफानाह प त कोपनम ्॥१५२॥ ES HATS श Meet HTL 82 Il ूल नं ead कट HOTA ु पाकरसं द पनं पाचनं Veaयं Aloe Woe लघ AT ु ।| Hingu Hingu (asa (asa foetida) foetida) mitigates mitigates vata, vata, kapha, kapha, cues cues distension distension of of the the abdomen abdomen and and colic, colic, aggravates aggravates pitta, pitta, pungent pungent in in taste taste and and at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, enhances enhances taste, taste, hunger, hunger, digestion digestion and and is is easily easily digestible. digestible. 152. 152. Haritaki Haritaki -कषायाALT मधुरा We पाके Bal ा farav वलवणा AY: लघुः १५३ HUA 243 द पनी oreaelt पाचनी Aca मे या ara: वयसः Faget थापनी परम aoe wT ् उ णवीया सरा बु ीि यबल दा १५४ STATA AT आय STISु या Faliraaseway wy क वयप3 ुराण वषम वरान~ ् Hrodauayd yasaret ु ठवैव यवैraya S शरो ses अ पा डु SATA ोगकामलाASU हणीगदान PNY HsTaTeT ् १५५ 854 सशोषशोफातीसारमे दमोहव मीन ् Bearshare dAमipaAler वासकास काशः Colles ल हानाहगरोदरम PTH HRAVAसेATA: IELAL ् १५६ 298, वब धं ोतसां गु ममू त भमरोचकम ् हर तक जये या धं तां तां च कफवातजान aA SATत ् CMVLACALT PepaTASHeT ् १५७ 8b Page Page No. No. 98 98 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Haritaki Haritaki is is astringent, astringent, sweet sweet at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, dry dry (causes (causes dryness) dryness) devoid devoid of of lavana lavana (possesses (possesses the the remaining remaining five five tastes) tastes) easily easily digestable, digestable, kindles kindles hunger, hunger, helps helps digestion, digestion, improves improves intelligence, intelligence, best best to to maintain maintain youth youth ,, hot hot in in potency, potency, laxative, laxative, bestows bestows long long life, life, strengthens strengthens the the mind mind and and the the sense sense organs, organs, cures cures leprosy leprosy (and (and other other skin skin diseases) diseases) discolouration, discolouration, disorders disorders of of voice, voice, chronic chronic intermittent intermittent fevers, fevers, diseases diseases of of the the head, head, and and eyes, eyes, anaemia, anaemia, heart heart disease, disease, jaundice, disease jaundice, disease of of the the duodenum, duodenum, consumption, consumption, dropsy, dropsy, diarrhoea, diarrhoea, obesity, obesity, fainting, fainting, vomiting, vomiting, worms worms (intestinal (intestinal parasites), parasites), dyspnoea, dyspnoea, cough, cough, excess excess salivation, salivation, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, disease disease of of the the spleen, spleen, distention distention of of the the abdomen, abdomen, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen, abdomen, obstruction obstruction of of channels, channels, abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, stiffness stiffness of of the the thing, thing, loss loss of of taste taste (anorexia0 (anorexia0 and and many many other other disease disease arising arising from from (aggravation (aggravation of of)) kapha kapha and and vata. vata. 153-157. 153-157. त वदामलकं शीतम प तकफापहम ् cadence arr लं earnest Similarly Similarly so so is is amalaka amalaka in in all all other other properties properties it it is is cold cold II potency, potency, and and mitigates mitigates pitta pitta and and kapha. kapha. कट पाके fen हमं क े यम मीष च त गण ae ु oh HeaHalsed cesT ु म् Aksha Aksha (vibhitaka) (vibhitaka) is is pungent pungent at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, cold cold in in potency, potency, good good for for hairs hairs and and possesses possesses properties properties similar similar (to (to haritaki haritaki and and amalaka) amalaka) but but slightly slightly less less (in (in degree). degree). 158 158 Triphala Triphala benefits: benefits: इयं फला अ यामयापहा ।| So रसायनवरा Taare PtH SASATAATIET रोपणी व गद FeAlcAalAeHwnarscl लेदमेदोमे हकफा िजत ् ॥१५९॥ Wott casa 11248Il Thus, Thus, the the Triphala Triphala (haritaki, (haritaki, amalaki amalaki and and vibhitaki), vibhitaki), together together is is aa best best rejuvenator rejuvenator of of the the body, body, cures cures diseases diseases of of the the eyes, eyes, heals heals wounds wounds and and cures cures skin skin diseases, diseases, excess excess moisture moisture of of the the tissues, tissues, obesity, obesity, diabetes, diabetes, aggravation aggravation of of kapha kapha and and Asra Asra (blood) (blood) 159. 159. Trijata Trijata and and Chaturjata Chaturjata सक े सरं Udall चतुजातं carat व प ल ै ं THM जतकम ् ।| PatctHay प त को प ती णो णं Kat ं रोचनद पनम ् ॥१६०॥ Facauanlte cdrevitsor WaeteroeteT | 260| Twak Twak —– (Cinnamon), (Cinnamon), patra patra (Cinnamon (Cinnamon leaf) leaf) and and Ela Ela – — (Cardamom) (Cardamom) together together are are known known as as Trijataka Trijataka and and these these along along with with kesara kesara from from the the chaturjata. chaturjata. They They cause cause aggravation aggravation of of pitta, pitta, are are penetrating, penetrating, hot hot in in potency, potency, cause cause dryness, dryness, improve improve taste taste and and hunger. hunger. 160 160 Page Page No. No. 99 99 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Maricha Maricha (pepper) (pepper) रए कटुकं कफ लघु ।| W पाक Wh े च och Hedनं म ANGरचं ay Black Black pepper pepper is is pungent pungent both both in in taste taste and and at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and is is easily easily digestable. digestable. Pippali Pippali (long (long pepper) pepper) ले मला dealt वीदश ि न ना च प पल १६१ wie Hal ा गActवु fersean a facaeh eae ु ीत आ aTसा शeset वपर ता 3tct: अतः Retse ि न धा Fear व ृ या TA रसे He: कटुः ु का fauttar वादप अ नल ले म वासकासापहा ERT सरा LER १६२ FAG ु ाका HferrLACALATAHRATTST युपयSot रसायनfare व धंfeet वना aqन ताम TAT ु जीत Tare Long Long pepper, pepper, in in its its green green state state aggravates aggravates kapha, kapha, is is sweet sweet in in taste taste and and cold cold in in potency, potency, not not easily easily digestible digestible and and is is unctous. unctous. The The same, same, when when dry, dry, becomes becomes opposite opposite -- aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, pungent pungent in in taste, taste, sweet sweet at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, mitigates mitigates Vata Vata and and Kapha, Kapha, usefin usefin in in asthma, asthma, cough; cough; is is laxative. laxative. Long Long pepper pepper should should not not be be used used in in excess, excess, for for long long period, period, without without following following the the regimen regimen of of rejuvenation rejuvenation therapy. therapy. 161-162 161-162 Ginger Ginger benefits: benefits: नागरं पनं व ा ह Feaयं faseereTe वब धनत a दae Gea 163 ु ् 163 ृ यं ais लघु Talgurh वादप ि न धो णं कफवातिजत Veaयं AY HwHaTapsTL ् ु ाकं Petseitsor Nagara (ginger), increases Nagara —–(ginger), increases hunger, hunger, is is aphrodisiac, aphrodisiac, water water absorbent, absorbent, good good for for the the heart heart (or (or the the mind), mind), relives relives constipation, constipation, bestows, bestows, taste, taste, easily easily digestible, digestible, sweet sweet at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, unctuous, unctuous, hot hot in in potency potency and and mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata. vata. 163 163 त वदा कमेत च TTयं Pag कटुकं जये aadarsnacted selत ् १६४ ey थौ याि नसदन वासकास ल पदपीनसान ् eatean oreo eareraraedtaetitorenat Similar Similar is is ardraka ardraka (fresh (fresh ginger, ginger, green); green); Trikatu Trikatu -- Pepper, Pepper, long long pepper pepper and and ginger ginger – — together together known known as as trikatu, trikatu, useful useful in in obesity,Asthma, obesity, Asthma, dyspepsia, dyspepsia, cough, cough, filariasis filariasis and and chronic chronic nasal nasal catarrh. catarrh. 164 164 च वका प पल मूलं ARaeted म रचा पा तरंaut: गुणःै afenttcrchye Chavaika Chavaika (Piper (Piper chaba) chaba) and and pippalimula pippalimula (long (long pepper pepper root) root) possess possess qualities qualities and and properties properties similar similar to to Marica Marica (black (black pepper) pepper) but but in in lesser lesser degree. degree. 165. 165. च को अि Fasc aideन समः Ga: पाक Ure े शोफाशः erp: क HiAprogy ृ मकु ठहा Page Page No. No. 100 100 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chitraka Chitraka (leadwort) (leadwort) is is similar similar to to fire fire in in digesting digesting thing thing and and cures cures dropsy, dropsy, haemorrhoids, haemorrhoids, worms worms and and leprosy leprosy (and (and othe othe skin skin diseases). diseases). प चकोलकमेत च म रचेन feat वना wualdaAded Ada म ृतम ् TAA ग ल TACHI eATe eet Aeपनं परम OL ् ु म ल होदरानाहश ू नं द The The above, above, excluding excluding marica, marica, (pippali, (pippali, pippalimula, pippalimula, cavya, cavya, citraka citraka and and nagara) nagara) is is known known as as panchakolaka, panchakolaka, It It cures cures abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, disease disease of of the the sleen, sleen, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen, abdomen, distension distension and and colic, colic, and and is is best best to to improve improve hunger hunger and and digestion. digestion. ब वका मयतकार पाटला ट टुकैमहत ् जये कषाय त तो णं प चमूलं कफा नलौ IcHITAAAoT USA stpifetott Bilwa, Bilwa, kasarya, kasarya, tarari, tarari, patala patala and and tintuka tintuka are are together together known known as as Mahat Mahat panchamula. panchamula. It It is is astringent astringent and and bitter bitter in in taste, taste, not not in in potency potency and and mitigate mitigate kapha kapha and and anila anila (vata (vata )) 167 167 हृ यंशुमती वयगो ुरकैः FAA म ृतम ् aedवं बsecaeAdicgamanh: वादप ना तशीतो णं सवदोशिजत FaGTae adatertsrd ् ु ाकरसं afaetarsot Brihatidwaya Brihatidwaya (brihati (brihati and and kantakari), kantakari), amsumatidwaya amsumatidwaya (saliparni (saliparni and and prsniparni) prsniparni) and and goksurakagoksurakatogether together are are known known as as hrasva hrasva panchamula panchamula (Laghu (Laghu panchamoola). panchamoola). It It is is sweet sweet in in taste taste and and at at the the end end of of digestion, digestion, neither neither very very hot hot nor nor very very cold cold in in potency potency and and mitigates mitigates all all the the dosas. dosas. 168. 168. The The above above two two —– laghu laghu and and mahat mahat panchamoola panchamoola constitute constitute Dashamoola Dashamoola बलाप न वयेन त ु नवैर डश TAG ATS YTपू पण THAT Jु म यमं कफवात त प तकरं सरम ACIA apd नं ना atcaat AA ् Bala, Bala, punarnava, punarnava, eranda, eranda, surpaparni surpaparni dvaya dvaya (masaparni (masaparni and and mundgaparni) mundgaparni) together together from from the the madhyama madhyama pancamula. pancamula. It It mitigates mitigates kapha kapha and and vata, vata, does does not not greatly greatly aggravate aggravate pitta pitta and and is is laxative. laxative. 169. 169. Jivan Jivan Pancamula Pancamula अभी वीराजीव तीजीवकषभकैः sitednofardslansarh: मत TATA ृ म् Haartयं तq ु च waysु यं वgee जीवना प ता नलापहम ् ृ यं cafe Abhiru jivanti, jivaka jivaka and jivana Abhiru —– Asparagus Asparagus racemosus, racemosus, vira, vira, jivanti, and rsabhaka rsabhaka together together from from the the jivana pancamula. pancamula. It It is is good good for for the the eye, eye, aphrodnd aphrodnd mitigates mitigates pitta pitta and and anila anila (vata) (vata) Trina Trina Mancmula Mancmula pier त ण प तिज भकासे ुशरशा ल भः ृ ा यं ecfsrestareaerentetay: इ यौषधवगः scaleerast: Trnakhya Trnakhya (trna (trna pancamula) pancamula) consisting consisting of of darbha, darbha, kasa, kasa, iksu, iksu, sara sara sali, sali, mitigates mitigates pitta. pitta. 171 171 Thus, Thus, were were described, described, in in brief, brief, the the substances substances used used daily daily as as food, food, in in groups groups such such as as suka, suka, simbi, simbi, pakvanna, pakvanna, mamsa, mamsa, saka, saka, phala phala and and ausadha. ausadha. 182 182 Thus Thus ends ends the the chapter chapter known known as as annaswarupa annaswarupa vijnaniya. vijnaniya. Page Page No. No. 101 101 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter नर Tater वध Chapter 7 7 Anna Anna Raksha Raksha Vidhi Vidhi अ 3teercat Protection Protection of of Food Food The The 7th 7th chapter chapter of of Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Asthanga Asthanga Hrudayam Hrudayam text text book book is is called called as as Anna Anna Raksha Raksha Vidhi Vidhi Adhyaya. Adhyaya. Anna Anna raksha raksha refers refers to to protection protection of of food. food. This This chapter chapter deals deals with with royal royal physician, physician, features features of of poisoned poisoned foods foods and and drinks, drinks, incompatible incompatible food food combinations, combinations, effects effects and and treatment, treatment, healthy healthy sleep sleep rules rules and and celibacy. celibacy. Pranacharya Pranacharya (Royal (Royal physician) physician) ::राजा Vagos राजगहृ ास ने ToTae ाणाचाय feraertd नवेशयेत ् Wat Udel H sack सवदा स भव येवं war सव viconsyia: तजाग ृ वः The The king king should should arrange arrange for for the the residence residence of of the the royal royal physician physician near near to to the the palace palace so so that that the the physician physician can can be be vigilant vigilant about about all all things things at at all all times. times. —– 11 Heo अ नपानं Tastgetafaersor वषा े वशेषेण Aga: मह पतेः arrestेमौ aartedt awatearया aयिfeetae योग तदाय तौ धमा नब te: धनाः The The foods foods and and drinks drinks of of the the king king should should be be protected protected from from poison, poison, because, because, the the King’s King’s health health and and welfare welfare depends depends on on his his food food and and drink drink and and the the health health and and welfare welfare of of the the country country is is dependant dependant on on the the King. King. – — 2 2 Features Features of of poisoned poisoned foods foods and and drinks drinks -ओदनो fava वषवान ् Gest सा ो या य व ा यता मव Heat sacattaewanwAa चरे ण प यते veal प वो sacayivarsa: भवे पयु षतोपमः3 ३ FAT Teas मयरू क ठतु यो मा मोहमू छा से ककृत ् ह यते ataeencd: वणग धा यैः fFaqaad ि ल यते afecatfeaa: चि का चतः ¥४ aad Boiled Boiled rice rice mixed mixed with with poison poison Sandra Sandra —– becomes becomes thick, thick, Even Even when when it it is is boiling, boiling, the the contends contends do do not not overflow overflow from from the the vessel.t vessel.t Chirena Chirena Pachyate Pachyate —– takes takes aa long long time time to to cook, cook, Pakvo Pakvo bhavati bhavati paryushitopama paryushitopama —– after after cooking cooking it it becomes becomes moist moist and and stale, stale, very very soon soon Mayura Mayura Kantha Kantha Tulyoshma Tulyoshma —– emits emits steam steam with with the the colour colour of of the the peacock’s peacock’s neck neck (blue), (blue), Moha Moha moorcha moorcha prasekakrut prasekakrut – — the the steams steams and and fumes fumes from from the the container container causes causes delusion, delusion, fainting fainting and and excessive excessive salivation. salivation. Heeyate Heeyate varna varna gandhadyaihi gandhadyaihi —– quickly quickly loses loses its its original original colour, colour, odour, odour, taste, taste, texture, texture, Klidyate Klidyate chandrikachitaha chandrikachitaha – — becomes becomes watery watery and and full full of of glistening glistening particles. particles. 3-4 3-4 Page Page No. No. 102 102 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan य जना याशु श याम वाथा न त AAU Aied AT Tच ु यि त MIAraAM ह त र ता fapar वकृता छाया dtन अ sfaRea orn फ े नो वराजी teleost ये त नै eta ataव वा ary५ सीम त त बु बुद Wea: स भवः elated dedतु daqa वि छ न वरसा WaT: रागः ख वाः शाकमा मषम ् ६& fafesrefaten Wesar: epanfayay The The side-dishes side-dishes dry dry up up quick quick and and become become dirty dirty reflective reflective images images seen seen in in them them appear appear deficient, deficient, malformed, malformed, abnormal abnormal or or not not seen seen at at all; all; froth froth and and lines lines appear appear on on their their surface surface and and edges, edges, threads threads and and bubbles bubbles are are likely likely to to appear. appear. Raga Raga (sweet (sweet syrups), syrups), Khandava Khandava (sweet (sweet puddings), puddings), vegetables vegetables and and meat meat become become broken broken (liquid (liquid and and solid solid portions portions get get separated) separated) and and acquire acquire bad bad taste. taste. 5-6. 5-6. नीला Well राजी TH, रसे ,arar ता ा af,ीरे ,auifer दध न Ted यते after शयावा, त े,घ पानीयसिiets नभा aa, आपीता ATA सता ash, FAतृ े Tela म त ु न SacHaaray, या कपोताभा, Tait राजी Pro कृ णा qa तष AeA ु ोदके wel काल ACATeIHA:, म या भसोः, aleौ े sftecter ह र तैले 3reoirsaA: अ णोपमः पाकः प वानां Uae प रकोथनम ् Ure: फलानामामानां WoneaAATe Tedret याणामा श यातां ForलाTfetaaor न ववणते FATA SAIN ct ु काणां FATA Heat मद क ठनानां aच sraceueiarea: भवे पश वपययः ू ां Hoot ृ न Aree मा य य Epledaed फु टत वं Fortes ला नग aenRaa: धा तरो वः यामम डलता FEA, व े, Meet शदनं ArT त तप मणाम ् CATAAVSAM ु ISAT धात म मला तता UaliFanarsaretcMey ु ौि तकका ठा मर ना दषु Acta नेह पश भाहा नः, सWAI भ वं qतु AAT म ृ मये SoerIMaeliet:, Neela Neela Raji Raji Rase Rase —– Blue Blue lines lines appear appear in in meat meat soup, soup, Tamra Tamra ksheere ksheere -- coppery coppery red red lines lines in in milk milk and and Shyava Shyava dadhani dadhani —– black black ones ones in in curds curds Peeta Peeta Sita Sita takre takre —– yellowish yellowish white white lines lines in in buttermilk, buttermilk, Ghrute Ghrute paaneeya paaneeya sannibha sannibha – — watery watery lines lines on on ghee, ghee, Mastuni Mastuni syat syat kapotabha kapotabha – — pegion pegion like like streaks streaks appear appear on on Mastu Mastu —– Supernatent Supernatent liquid liquid of of curds curds (whey), (whey), Raji Raji krishna krishna tushodake tushodake —– blue blue black black lines lines on on Tusodaka Tusodaka (sour (sour drink drink prepared prepared from from barley barley husk), husk), Kaali black lines Kaali madya madya ambhasoho ambhasoho —–black lines on on wines wines and and water, water, Harit Harit taile taile arunopama arunopama – — green green lines lines in in honey honey and and crimson crimson lines lines on on oils. oils. Unripe Unripe fruits fruits ripen ripen (fast) (fast) and and ripe ripe ones ones become become overripe overripe and and decomposed. decomposed. Substances Substances which which are are green green and and dry dry become become dull dull in in appearance appearance and and discolored., discolored., Soft Soft food food substances substances become become hard hard and and vice vice versa. versa. The The flowers flowers of of the the garland garland become become split split at at their their edges, edges, fade fade and and assume assume unnatural unnatural smell. smell. Dirty Dirty patches patches appear appear on on cloth cloth (dress (dress and and other other apparels), apparels), its its threads threads and and hems hems fall fall out. out. Vessels Vessels prepared prepared from from metals, metals, pearls, pearls, wood, wood, stone, stone, precious precious stones stones etc. etc. become become dirty, dirty, and and lose lose their their smooth smooth touch touch and and luster. luster. Mud Mud vessels vessels gain gain smooth smooth touch touch and and luster. luster. 5-11. 5-11. Page Page No. No. 103 103 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Vishada Vishada Laksana Laksana (features (features of of the the person person who who puts puts poison) poison) ::वषदः earaesarear यावशु का यो facradt वल ो वी दशः १२ faye: ceraते feer: 22 वे द वे प थ म ां तो भीतः खल त ज भते Racal ata: eet Ara ु ृ The The person person who who is is about about to to poison poison someone someone will will have have Shyava Shyava shushka shushka Asya Asya – — dry dry and and discoloured discoloured ace ace Vilaksho Vilaksho Veekshate Veekshate dishaha dishaha – — eccentrically eccentrically looks looks in in all all directions directions Sveda Sveda vepathuman vepathuman —– sweating sweating and and tremors tremors Trasta tired, Trasta —–tired, Bheeta frightened Bheeta —–frightened Skhalati Skhalati – — slips slips while while talking talking and and walking walking Jrumbhate Jrumbhate —– yawns yawns frequently. frequently. 12 12 Testing Testing of of poisoned poisoned foods foods – — Vishanna Vishanna Pareeksha Pareeksha ा या नं aay स वषं caitatarad: वि नरे कावतः epecaia फुट य त Waist शखीक ठाभ ध चव arate ग era धवान ertnvorst qafeet rey ् ूमा चरनfeat Upon Upon throwing throwing the the poisoned poisoned food food on on fire, fire, itit emits emits crackling crackling sound, sound, the the flame flame emits emits as as aa single single pile, pile, without without whirls, whirls, the the colour colour of of smoke smoke resembles resembles to to that that of of peacock’s peacock’s neck neck (glistening (glistening blue), blue), sometimes sometimes the the flame flame may may not not come come up up at at all. all. It It will will cause cause emitting emitting of of very very foul foul and and strong strong smell. smell. य ते Aleta: म काः GVA ा य काकः ाम वरो stadt भवेत ् faaec leh: aca उ ोशि त Tच EA टैव तAeSHSIYSANAT: छुकदा यूहसा रकाः SMRMfed ae: हंसः Weaetd, खल त, tafeciassiaca ला नज व जीव य srad जायते TaNeE चकोर यseared, अ वैरा यं , pleaser ौ च य Laeaeles: या मदोदयः कपोतपरभCATIPAA जह यसन PUAN ू ् ृ च वाका ASAT उ वे गं Uist या त Alsi:, माजारः, शक वानरः Sega MpraSaa ृ मु च त AWelx: ये मयरू त या म दतेजो भवे वषम ् इ य नं fayasatca वषव ा वा Aaled यजेदेवं Wace: य नतः Sood यथा det तेन area वप ये र wear नप न ु ज तवः a afaoieda: Mriyate Mriyate Makshikaaha Makshikaaha —– upon upon eating eating such such food, food, bees bees die die Kaakaha Kaakaha kshaamasvaro kshaamasvaro bhavet bhavet – — Crow Crow voice voice becomes becomes depleted depleted Parot, just by Parot, Dathyuha Dathyuha (gallinule (gallinule bird) bird) and and Sarika Sarika (Mynah) (Mynah) start start hooting hooting at at the the poisoned poisoned food food just by seeing seeing it. it. Hamsaha Hamsaha praskhalati praskhalati – — Swan Swan changes changes its its gait gait Glaanih: jeevenjeevasya jaayate jaayate –— Chukar Glaanih: jeevenjeevasya Chukar gets gets exhausted exhausted Chakorasya Chakorasya akshivairaagyam akshivairaagyam – — Greeh Greeh pheasant’s pheasant’s eyes eyes turn turn red red Kraunchasya Kraunchasya madodaya: madodaya: – — Pond Pond heron heron becomes becomes intoxicated intoxicated Pigeon, Pigeon, Parabhrit Parabhrit (Cuckoo) (Cuckoo) and and Chaktravaaka Chaktravaaka lose lose their their life life UdvegaM UdvegaM yaati yaati maarjaara: maarjaara: —– cat cat becomes becomes irritated, irritated, excited excited Page Page No. No. 104 104 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Shakrun Shakrun munchati munchati vanara: vanara: – — monkey monkey defecates defecates After After confirming confirming the the poisoned poisoned food food by by above above methods, methods, it it should should be be disposed disposed away away carefullycarefully- 141418 18 Diseases Diseases caused caused by by poisoned poisoned food food – — (Visha (Visha annaja annaja Vikara) Vikara) —– FSET प ृ टे त ु HVAT क डूदाहोषाSATIS वरा त फोटसु AT: तयः नखारोम यIa: का या FA वषनाशनाः TERA Vth:, से AHA FeAeaAr: ु तः शोफः, WeANCAT श ा त WMT लेपा च Aetdeaadah: से यच दनप कैः ससोमव ehaleh कताल AIA सप क ठामCe त aad H2 ु oda: ृ ानतैः External External effects: effects: The The touch touch of of poisoned poisoned foods foods produces produces itching itching and and irritation, irritation, burning burning sensation sensation all all over over the the body, body, burning burning sensation sensation at at the the site site of of touch, touch, fever, fever, pain, pain, eruptions, eruptions, loss loss of of tactile tactile sensation, sensation, falling falling of of the the nails nails and and hairs hairs and and swelling. swelling. The The treatment treatment shall shall be be bathing bathing (washing), (washing), pouring pouring with with water water processed processed with with anti-poisonous anti-poisonous drugs, drugs, application application of of paste paste of of Sevya Sevya (Ushira), (Ushira), Candana Candana (sandalwood), (sandalwood), Padmaka Padmaka – — Wild Wild Himalayan Himalayan Cherry Cherry (heart (heart wood) wood) – — Prunus Prunus puddum puddum // cerasoides;, cerasoides;, Somavalka, Somavalka, Talisa Talisa Patra Patra – — Cinnamomum Cinnamomum tamala, tamala, Kushta Kushta (Saussurea (Saussurea lappa), lappa), Amrita Amrita (Tinospora) (Tinospora) and and Nata Nata – — Valeriana Valeriana wallichi. wallichi. 19-20. 19-20. लालािज वो ठयोजा यमूषा PapAaraaaH, च म चमायनम ् Aenisedsoarsisayer द तहष Caicd रसा वं SATA हनु त भ च वshatगे ardent से या यै त ग डूषाः ws सव aच faeat वशिज तम ् emeaear wos: Local Local effect effect in in oral oral cavity: cavity: Poisoned Poisoned food food inside inside mouth mouth causes causes excess excess of of salivation, salivation, inactivity inactivity of of the the tongue tongue and and lips, lips, burning burning sensation, sensation, tingling tingling of of the the teeth, teeth, inability inability to to perceive perceive taste taste and and stiffness jaw. stiffness of of the the lower lower jaw. The The treatment treatment shall shall be be mouth mouth gargling gargling with with water water processed processed with with Sevya Sevya – — Khus Khus Khus Khus – — Vetiveria Vetiveria zizanioides zizanioides and and other other drugs drugs mentioned mentioned earlier earlier and and all all other other therapies therapies for for the the mouth mouth which which are are anti-poisonous. anti-poisonous. 21-21½. 21-21//. आमाशयगते वेदमू छा मानमद TAT: माः HAUT FACET रोमहष व मदाह vaaqeqaeay च ु दयरोधनम ् THES arate ब द ु भ चाचयो अ गानां, प वाशयगते Yat: पुनः faeqavasa ASIA, THAMATT अने कवण aaa वम त म HeaHat Aiea ू य य तसायते त डुतवमुदरं TeAASATT: बलस यः aoal ा क Hed WAAL ृ श वं पा तयोवा तवर त य ह ड aadieaaReaes eReर े कटभीं Healt ग qs ु म् स दव पकाशतपisa: वकाः Peqarktatersaraan ु ा रत न पावबािteresa त डुल यकमल कु कुटाVSAACT डमव गAA ज ू ा न PPC ु म् ogee नावना जनपानेषु योजये वषशा तये AMAAFAATUAT Bolahasenecay Page Page No. No. 105 105 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Reaching Reaching stomach stomach itit produces produces sweating, sweating, fainting, fainting, flatulence, flatulence, toxicity, toxicity, giddiness, giddiness, horripilations, horripilations, vomiting, vomiting, burning burning sensation, sensation, loss loss of of movement movement of of the the eyes eyes and and heart, heart, and and appearance appearance of of black black dots dots all all over over the the body. body. Reaching Reaching of of the the intestines intestines it it produces produces vomiting vomiting of of many many colours, colours, excess excess of of urination, urination, purgation, purgation, drowsiness, drowsiness, emaciation, emaciation, pallor, pallor, enlargement enlargement of of the the abdomen abdomen and and loss loss of of strength. strength. For For both both these these conditions conditions the the patient patient should should be be administered administered Vamana Vamana (emesis) (emesis) and and Virechana Virechana (purgation (purgation therapies), therapies), followed followed by by Nasya Nasya (nasal (nasal medication), medication), Anjana Anjana (collyriums) (collyriums) and and drinking drinking of of decoction decoction prepared prepared from from Haridra Haridra —– Turmeric Turmeric Rhizome Rhizome —– Curcuma Curcuma Longa, Longa, and and Daruharidra Daruharidra (Berberis jaggery, Sinduvarita, (Berberis aristata), aristata), Katabhi Katabhi – — Celastrus Celastrus paniculata, paniculata, GudaGuda- jaggery, Sinduvarita, Nispava, Nispava, Baspika, Baspika, Sataparvika, Sataparvika, roots roots of of Tanduliyaka, Tanduliyaka, Kukkutanda Kukkutanda – — hen’s hen’s egg egg and and Avalguja Avalguja – — Psoralea Psoralea corylifolia corylifolia to to relieve relieve the the effect effect of of poison. poison. 22-26. 22-26. Hrid Hrid Vishodhana Vishodhana —– Gara Gara Visha Visha Chikitsa Chikitsa -- Treatment Treatment to to detoxify detoxify heart heart and and to to treat treat chronic chronic poisoning: poisoning: वषभु ताय acated द या च श favre eeedaeeaay ु ायो वमध तथा स रजः काले वशोधनम ् २७ Ge AAS: Hier स Taleौ ं Talat Ao ू मं ता श Weु े ततः शाणं मचूण य दापये Eeद Ad: wor हेsas aaaत ् न जते AUS हे मपा गे प प ेअ GAG बुव IATA वषम ् २८ a स Asal TATA 2 ard faye aeुगरे अ saeयेष fater: जायते वपुलं चाय व धः Ey: म ृतः When When there there is is poisoning, poisoning, first first vomiting vomiting and and purgation purgation therapy therapy is is conducted conducted to to remove remove remnant remnant poison poison in in the the gut. gut. Then, Then, to to cleanse cleanse and and detoxify detoxify heart, heart, Tamra Tamra bhasma bhasma is is administered administered to to the the patient. patient. After After that, that, Swarna Swarna bhasma bhasma is is administered administered for for aa long long period period of of time. time. By By such such Swarna Swarna administration administration for for long long time, time, the the body body becomes becomes as as pure pure as as Gold. Gold. The The term term used used for for this this is is ‘Hemapanga’. “‘Hemapanga’. Na Sajjate Hemapange padmapatre padmapatre ambuvat Na Sajjate Hemapange ambuvat visham visham || || In In aa person person who who has has been been given given Gold Gold bhasma bhasma for for aa long long time, time, the the poison poison can can not not do do any any harm, harm, similar similar to to aa water water drop drop that that can can not not touch touch the the leaf leaf of of the the lotus. lotus. The The person person gains gains long long life. life. The The same same treatment treatment is is followed followed in in Gara Gara Visha Visha (chronic (chronic poisoning) poisoning) also. also. Incompatible Incompatible foods foods (Viruddha (Viruddha Ahara):Ahara):व मप च आहारं faeaefasensay व या वषगरोपमम ् fasaare a 3ten On On many many occasions, occasions, consuming consuming two two food food items items together together or or aa particular particular type type of of food food processing processing may may render render the the food food toxic. toxic. It It is is called called as as incompatible incompatible food. food. Even Even incompatible incompatible foods foods should should be be considered considered similar similar to to poison poison/ / artificial artificial poisoning. poisoning. 29. 29. Page Page No. No. 106 106 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Examples: Examples: अनूपमा मषं arsaitasiniaecs: माष ौ ीर व ढकैः saa व यते ae सह fadaerhet बसैमलक गड faectad ू े न WS ु ेन aTवा fagrsrcuaar वशेषा पयसा Aces म या Aceavary म ये व प Feretifaa: चल चमः Anupa Anupa mamsa mamsa with with Masha, Masha, Kshaudra, Kshaudra, Ksheera Ksheera and and Virudaka Virudaka – — Meat Meat of of animals animals of of marshy marshy regions regions is is incompatible incompatible with with black black gram, gram, honey, honey, milk milk and and germinated germinated grains. grains. Bisa, jaggery is Bisa, Mulaka Mulaka (Radish (Radish —– Raphanus Raphanus sativus) sativus) or or Guda Guda jaggery is incompatible incompatible with with fish. fish. Fish Fish with with milk, milk, especially especially Chilichima Chilichima variety variety of of fist fist with with milk milk is is incompatible. incompatible. 30. 30. व म लं पयसा सह सव फलं तथा त कुल थवरकक गव ACIव CHACMALHASTACAHDSCHT: ु लमकु टकाः All All sour sour substances substances are are incompatible incompatible with with milk. milk. Sour Sour fruits fruits with with milk milk is is not not recommended. recommended. Horse Horse gram gram (Kulattha), (Kulattha), Varaka, Varaka, Kangu, Kangu, Valla Valla and and Makustaka. Makustaka. -- these these are are not not recommended recommended along along with with cow cow milk. milk. 31½. 311%. After After consuming consuming green green leafy leafy vegetables vegetables and and radish, radish, drinking drinking milk milk should should be be avoided. avoided. 32. 32. वाराहं ase वा वधा ना या ना प ष ANT MRAYTAHpaHel ृ तकु कुटौ आममांसा न प तेन , माषसूपेन मूलकम ् अ वं Parsee, कुसु भशाकेन, fos: बसैः AE सह Taesny व ढकम ् sft माषसूपगुड ीरद या यैल ाकुचं फलम ् Hel फलं HaeAeAHT कद या त े ण atal द ना Alec तालफलेन ATवा कणोषणा यां AYA मधुना HHA काकमाचीं गSet PUTTIN ुडेन aTवा स ां वा म यपचने Tae पचने ATT नागर य aT वा fet a AceKaATay स ाम य aTवा OT पा े HIATcAg कामा तमु षतां नशाम ् Peas AT Pere Pork Pork should should not not be be taken taken along along with with porcupine porcupine meet. meet. (Kukkuta) (Kukkuta) Chicken Chicken and and Spotted Spotted deer deer should should not not be be taken taken along along with with curds curds Uncooked Uncooked meat meat along along with with bile bile radish radish along along with with black black gram gram Sheep Sheep meat meat along along with with leaves leaves of of Kusumba Kusumba herb herb Germinated Germinated grains grains along along with with Bisa Bisa Lakucha Lakucha Phala Phala along along with with black black gram gram soup soup (masha (masha supa) supa) Banana Banana along along with with butter butter milk milk is is not not recommended recommended Curds Curds along along with with Tala Tala phala phala (Palm (Palm date) date) Pippali, Pippali, Maricha Maricha and and honey honey Kakamachi jaggery Kakamachi along along with with jaggery Black Black pepper pepper along along with with fish fish or or during during digestion digestion of of fish fish -- 33-36. 33-36. म य न तेलन नेहे Ufa: सा धताः Pccetrecsstt प पल यजेत ् Aceaiatdeaene कां ये दशाहमु षतं स प Page Page No. No. 107 107 णं व करे Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Pippali Pippali (long (long pepper) pepper) processed processed with with the the oil oil in in which which fish fish is is fried fried should should be be rejected. rejected. Ghee Ghee kept kept in in bronze bronze vessel vessel for for more more than than 10 10 days days should should not not be be taken. taken. Hot Hot substances substances or or hot hot procedures procedures (like (like sun sun bath) bath) is is not not recommended recommended along along with with Bhallataka. Bhallataka. 37. 37. भासो व यते श प ल त सा धतः ae Taetad wer: HPUekeaweateld: ू यः कि Meat Meat of of Bhasa Bhasa bird bird —– white white headed headed vulture vulture should should not not be be roasted. roasted. Kampilla Kampilla (a (a dish) dish) prepared prepared with with buttermilk buttermilk —– 37½. 37’. एक प रवजये त ् Uaeयं पायसस TTT: ुराकृशराः Waa Mixing Mixing of of milk, milk, beer beer and and Krishara Krishara (rice (rice – — green green gram gram dish) dish) -- 38 38 ayatcarcteaietates मध ुस पवसातैलपा नया न एक UT afaeniearer: वशाि शः वा समांशा न fAVeAeaA व य ते पर परम ् ३९ aT AareMfer WEATA 3e Mixing Mixing of of equal equal quantities quantities of of any any 2, 2, 3 3 or or all all of of the the following following is is not not recommended recommended —– honey, honey, ghee, ghee, meat meat fat, fat, sesame sesame oil oil and and beverages. beverages. Peay stप म Avasd भ नांशे अ या ये Tecra द यवायनaaa: ुपानतः मध प म Aypataal FT, मध ALATA ु ु करबीजं च, ु ैरेयशाकरम ् म थानुपानः Arua: ैरेय ो, हा र ः कट eat, sa: Aederarey ु तैलवान ् Honey Honey along along with with ghee, ghee, even even in in unequal unequal proportions, proportions, should should not not be be consumed consumed along along with with water. water. Honey Honey along along with with seeds seeds of of Pushkara, Pushkara, Honey, Honey, along along with with wine wine of of dates dates (Maireya) (Maireya) and and sugar sugar Milk Milk drinks drinks along along with with Mantha Mantha (solution (solution of of corn corn flour) flour) Turmeric Turmeric with with mustard mustard oil oil is is incompatible. incompatible. उपोदक sifaanm अ तसाराय aero तलक केन atar सा धता sNewr Upodika Upodika (Indian (Indian spinach) spinach) processed processed along along with with sesame sesame seed seed paste paste causes causes diarrhoea. diarrhoea. -- 41 41 बलाका वा णीयु ता HoaAvseT कुलमाषै च faeeact व यते sora aALeysa भSel वराहवसया Sa सैव स नह यसून ् Healयो erercAyey ृ टा Medea Meat Meat of of Balaka Balaka bird bird along along with with Varuni Varuni (date (date wine) wine) and and Kulmasha Kulmasha (green (green gram gram and and other other pulses pulses cooked cooked together) together) Meat Meat of of Balaka Balaka along along with with pork pork fat fat is is lethal. lethal. त वि ति तरप ा यगोधालवक जलाः Aeaiccle RIAA MAM ATH पSAT: एर डेनाि Wests नना स ा त तैलेन faaresar: वमूि छताः eredecteet Page Page No. No. 108 108 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Meat Meat of of Tittiri, Tittiri, peacock, peacock, Godha Godha (Iguana (Iguana lziard), Iziard), Lava Lava (common (common quail), quail), Kapinjala, Kapinjala, cooked cooked by by the the fire fire of of wood wood ofcastor ofcastor and and processed processed with, with, fried fried in in castor castor oil oil is is lethal. lethal. हार तमांसं हा र शूल क ोतपा चतम ् ह र ावि नना AeA स यो carmmaate यापादय त sraaz जी वतम ् SRaldiectea Meat Meat of of Haridra Haridra (yellow (yellow bird) bird) piered piered with with wood wood of of Haridra Haridra and and cooked cooked with with the the flame flame of of Haridra Haridra is is lethal. lethal. भ मपांशुप र व तं तदे समा कम ् AATIYIRCAET acaव Tच Wale Meat Meat of of Haridra, Haridra, cooked cooked by by smearing smearing ash ash and and sand, sand, consumed consumed along along with with honey honey kills kills the the person person quickly. quickly. Definition Definition of of Viruddha Viruddha —– incompatible incompatible -यत feta उ ले य न तत ् SAN: समासत: ।| ४५ ् कि चत ay ् दोषं screxes Ud a हरे tdत ् dd ys ।| व म |् । fava In In brief, brief, whichever whichever food food or or activity activity that that causes causes increase increase of of Doshas Doshas but but does does not not expel expel the the Dosha Dosha out out of of the the body body is is termed termed as as Viruddha. Viruddha. Note: Note: In In Panchakarma Panchakarma treatment treatment also, also, Dosha Dosha is is increased increased and and then then expelled expelled out out of of body. body. But But in in Panchakarma, Panchakarma, though though there there is is increase increase of of Dosha, Dosha, because because they they are are expelled expelled out, out, there there is is no no harm. harm. But But in in Viruddha Viruddha Ahara, Ahara, the the food food causes causes only only increase increase of of Dosha, Dosha, leading leading to to toxic toxic symptoms. symptoms. The The treatment treatment for for incompatible incompatible food food consumption consumption is is श त वरो easy: ध भः ahaTaSeT AY वा aT Tafa ु र े टा शमो Shodhana purification procedure Shodhana – — purification procedure – — Panchakarma Panchakarma Shamana palliative treatment Shamana —–palliative treatment Virodha Virodha chikitsa chikitsa – — symptom symptom based based treatment. treatment. यै तैरेव वा र या भसं कृ तः getedta at पodूव शर ethentaesic: Health Health should should be be restored restored quickly quickly by by using using food food that that have have opposite opposite qualities qualities to to that that of of incompatible incompatible foods. foods. यायामिRaa न धद afetas: ताि नवयः CAsTeM थबलशा pera लनाम CARATA sL ् वरो य प न पीडायै areraqaed सा यम पं च भोजनम vb ् ४७ favrearey a tisret oT alse Page Page No. No. 109 109 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan In In those those who who exercise exercise regularly, regularly, who who are are habituated habituated to to oily oily fatty fatty food, food, who who have have good good digestion digestion power, power, in in young, young, and and strengthful, strengthful, the the incompatible incompatible food food will will not not cause cause any any ill ill effects. effects. In In those, those, who who are are habituated habituated (sathmya) (sathmya) to to incompatible incompatible food food and and in in those those who who take take low low quantities quantities of of incompatible incompatible food food for for aa long long period period of of time, time, the the ill ill effects effects will will not not be be seen. seen. 47 47 Satmikarana Satmikarana Krama Krama – — (method (method of of accustomization) accustomization) ::पादे नाप यम य तं Werle पादपादे न वा यजेत ् Tease TW Aad नषेवेत feat हतं aqdénalastedttdy त वदे क व य तर कृतम ् Ye ४८ frida Unhealthy Unhealthy things things – — foods, foods, drinks, drinks, activities activities which which have have become become accustomed accustomed by by long long use use should should be be discontinued discontinued by by quarter quarter and and quarter quarter gradually. gradually. Similarly Similarly healthy healthy things things (foods (foods etc.) etc.) should should be be gradually gradually made made use use with with intevals intevals of of 1, 1, 2 2 and and 3 3 days. days. 48. 48. अप यम प feह coed य तं effet शी लतं पweaaAa यमेव at वा smzaaTer सा यासा य वकाराय जायते सहसा 31-AAT अ यथा ve ४९ TICFUMATCAASNIT SAA ASAT Sudden Sudden discontinuance discontinuance of of unhealthy unhealthy things, things, foods, foods, drinks drinks etc. etc. and and indulgence indulgence in in healthy healthy things, things, done done suddenly suddenly and and improperly improperly give give rise rise to to diseases diseases 49 49 मेणाप चता ars: दोषाः HATMGTAA मेणोप चता FUT: गण HATTA ु ाः स तो WeaaHaAHecy या यपुनभावम क या Hafed भवि त 7च Todt The The ill ill effects effects of of incompatible incompatible foods foods that that eliminated eliminated gradually gradually and and good good habits habits developed developed gradually gradually leads leads to to robust robust health. health. अ य तसि नधानानां दोषाणां दष ू णा मनाम ् अ हतैदषणं भूयो aन facarey व वान ् Hdsiefer कतमह त sedgent ू sat ु Wise Wise men men should should not not help help the the intimate intimate vitiating vitiating factors factors by by indulging indulging in in unhealthy unhealthy things. things. Trayopastambha Trayopastambha -- Three Three pillars pillars of of life life -आहारशयना मचयैयु या Tats: योिजतैः ।| शर धायते ferrari न यमागार मव ast: धारणैः ॥il ५२ FeRAM ek रं aie sz ॥I Ahara Ahara —– food, food, Shayana Shayana – — Sleep Sleep and and Abrahmacharya Abrahmacharya (non-celibecy) (non-celibecy) – — properly properly indulged, indulged, support support the just like the body body constantly constantly just like the the house house is is supported supported by by the the pillars. pillars. Page Page No. No. 110 110 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Sleep Sleep – — Nidra Nidra -न ाय तं GE सुखं Ge दख पुि टः का flared Hetय बलाबलम Fors4sy ् ु ं yise: व ष GVA ृ ता ल बता Weta ानं ानं जी वतं aन aTच ५३ Fellsal sifad 43 Happiness Happiness and and unhappiness, unhappiness, proper proper nourishment nourishment or or emaciation, emaciation, strength strength and and debility, debility, sexual sexual powers powers and and impotence, impotence, knowledge knowledge and and ignorance, ignorance, life life and and its its absence absence (death) (death) —– all all are are dependent dependent on on sleep. sleep. 53. 53. अकाले 3ased अ स गा च aन aच fear न ा fersfaar नषे वता sare सुखायुषी Wrpate पराकुयात ् FORTARATRT कालरा रवापरा sy ५४ GSM Akaala Akaala nidra nidra – — sleep sleep at at improper improper time, time, Atiprasanga Atiprasanga – — excess excess sleep sleep Na Na nidra nidra – — lack lack of of sleep sleep – — these these three three destroys destroys health. health. 54. 54. रा ौ STINT जागरणं Bat, ं, िSarsel न धं WeateT वपनं fear दवा Tal अ मन भ यि द camara वासीन चला यतम ् ५५ wearAasaieg 93 Ratri jagarana —– Keeping Ratri jagarana Keeping awake awake at at nights nights (avoiding (avoiding sleep) sleep) is is dry dry (causes (causes dryness dryness inside inside the the body), body), Divasvapna Divasvapna —– sleeping sleeping during during daytime daytime is is unctuous unctuous (causes (causes moistness moistness inside) inside) and and Taking Taking aa nap nap sitting sitting comfortably comfortably (during (during day) day) is is neither neither dry dry nor nor unctuous unctuous 55. 55. MSA asa: ी मे aaa वायुचयादानरौ यराeae य पभावतः दवा व नो feat हतो अ यि मन ् कफ प तकरो iह सः fearcacal safest pwpitecdeay S: HFA FT ु avayencaneaea spay:भः म भा ययाना वम य ीभारकम ु वा त PIMs: ोधशोकभयैः Foley ला तान ् CAA वास ह CAAT: मा तसा रणः व FaeerseraorgseperMis are ् ृ बालाबल ीणत ृ शूलापी डतान Sleeping Sleeping during during day day time time is is beneficial beneficial during during summer, summer, because because in in that that season, season, Vata Vata undergoes undergoes mild mild increase, increase, dryness dryness is is more, more, nights nights are are short; short; Day Day sleeping sleeping during during other other seasons seasons causes causes Kapha Kapha and and Pitta Pitta increase. increase. Who Who can can have have day day sleep? sleep? बह कफः TAY: व युः Totने Shea ह न या aAletet च नाह न TEAG: ु मेदः HH: fast: Hvata ataव जात ord ु ferenecaty वषातः क ठरोगी aच नै नशा व प Day Day sleeping sleeping is is good good for for those those who who are are exhausted exhausted by by excessive excessive speaking, speaking, riding, riding, walking, walking, wine, wine, woman woman (sexual (sexual intercourse), intercourse), carrying carrying heavy heavy load, load, physical physical activities, activities, tired tired by by anger, anger, grief grief and and fear, fear, for for those those suffering suffering from from asthma, asthma, hiccup, hiccup, diarrhea, diarrhea, for for the the aged, aged, the the children, children, the the debilitated, debilitated, the the emaciated, emaciated, those those having having injury, injury, thirst, thirst, abdominal abdominal pain, pain, indigestion; indigestion; those those assaulted, assaulted, those those Page Page No. No. 111 111 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan intoxicated, intoxicated, and and those those who who are are habituated habituated to to day day sleep. sleep. In In them them it it maintains maintains the the normalcy normalcy of of the the tissues tissues and and the the Kapha Kapha nourishes nourishes the the body. body. 56-59. 56-59. Who Who should should not not have have day day sleep? sleep? Obese, Obese, in in whom whom Kapha Kapha is is aggravated, aggravated, who who take take regular regular oily oily food, food, Those Those who who are are suffering suffering from from poisoning poisoning and and throat throat disease disease patients patients should should not not sleep sleep even even at at night. night. अकालशयना Aes मोह वर eAतैATT: म यपीनसाः HHA शरो शोफ लासGAN ोतोरोधािsetAeac: नम दताः ६१ RRsFaHECAR &8 त उपवासवमन वेदनावनमौषधम aa Sd Aa eagetl dag ATT ् Sleeping Sleeping at at improper improper time time causes causes delusion, delusion, fever, fever, lassitude, lassitude, nasal nasal catarrh, catarrh, headache, headache, dropsy, dropsy, oppression oppression in in the the chest chest (nausea), (nausea), obstruction obstruction of of the the tissue tissue pores pores and and weakness weakness of of digestive digestive function; function; for for this this fasting, fasting, emesis, emesis, sudation sudation and and nasal, nasal, medications medications are are the the treatment. treatment. 61-61½. 61-614. योजये द त न ायां dlect ती णं wescasser छदना जनम Derefattart a, ् adel नावनं Asae ल घनं faleat च तां cars यवायं eitenatigper: शोकभी ु धः ए भरे व Tच Asa न ाया AM: नाशः ले Waa ASATA ISAमा तस यात ् In In case case of of excess excess of of sleep, sleep, strong strong emetics, emetics, collyrium, collyrium, nasal nasal drops, drops, fasting, fasting, worry, worry, sexual sexual intercourse, intercourse, grief, grief, fear fear and and anger anger are are advocated. advocated. By By these these the the Kapha Kapha gets gets decreased decreased leading leading to to loss loss of of sleep. sleep. 62-63. 62-63. न ानाशाद गमद शरोगौरवजिृ P TT: भकाः feraTot eng NaS SaTAC जा य ला न मापि तत ा रोगा wsarentesrAraiecdaeal Weeच वातजाः AST: Loss Loss of of sleep sleep leads leads to to squeezing squeezing pain pain in in the the body body parts, parts, heaviness heaviness of of the the head, head, too too much much of of yawning, yawning, lassitude, lassitude, exhaustion exhaustion (even (even without without strain), strain), giddiness, giddiness, indigestion, indigestion, stupor stupor and and diseases diseases of of Vata Vata origin. origin. 64. 64. यथाकालमतो न ां रा वेत सा यतः aararaaay feat Wal ौ से Saat Bera: असा या जागरादध Td: ातः TACT व यादभुFAA तवान 3McAissNEy CT ् Hence, Hence, the the person person should should sleep sleep at at the the proper proper time time at at nights nights daily daily as as much much as as desirable desirable and and become become habituated habituated to to it. it. If If he he has has kept kept awake awake at at night night due due to to non-habituation non-habituation (not (not accustomed accustomed to), to), he he should should sleep sleep for for half half that that period, period, the the next next morning morning without without taking taking any any food. food. 65. 65. शीलये म द न तु atacand ीरम यरसानafer ्द ध heairAcatetatd अ य गो वतन नानमध ू कणा तपणम ् का लेषो ferdic: नव ृ तः क ple ताबाह AAT EAA Hapeser ृ तकृ यता ु लता ATT मनो अनुकूला वषयाः कामं न ासुख दाः Page Page No. No. 112 112 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan TEAURN AAMAS मचायरते ा यसुखetनःSSAA: पह ृ चेतसः न ा स तोषत ृ त fret Peas य कालं ना तवतते Faवं aro aftada Those Those suffering suffering from from very very little little sleep sleep (or (or no no sleep sleep at at all), all), should should indulge indulge in in the the use use of of milk, milk, wine, wine, meat meat soup soup and and curds curds (as (as food), food), oil oil massage massage and and mild mild squeezing squeezing (of (of the the body), body), bath, bath, anointing anointing the the head, head, ears ears and and eyes eyes with with nourishing nourishing oils, oils, comforting comforting embrace embrace by by the the arms arms of of the the wife, wife, harbouring harbouring the the feeling feeling of of satisfaction satisfaction of of having having done done good good deeds deeds and and resorting resorting to to things things which which are are comforting comforting to to the the mind mind as as much much as as desired; desired; these these bring bring about about the the pleasure pleasure of of good good sleep. sleep. For For those those who who follow follow the the regimen regimen of of celibacy, celibacy, who who are are not not very very crazy crazy of of sexual sexual intercourse intercourse and and who who are are contented contented with with happiness, happiness, sleep sleep will will not not be be very very late late than than its its regular regular time. time. 66 66 —– 68. 68. Abrahmacharya non celibacy Abrahmacharya – — non celibacy -ा यधम Gate यजे नार Aacaea मनु तानां रज वलाम ् MATA TACT अ याम याचारांgece द ु टस afraraarani क uiNeoits णमेहनाम ् अ त थल भणीय ययो षतम seep Fatत aes sy ् ू कृशां स ु ां ग व णनीम ययो नं च ग ु दे वन ृप ालयम ् soersie a TReaey TATA चै य मशाना आयतनच वारा ब च UAAM A HATTA PATO ु त ु पथम ् पव यन गं दवसं शरो दयताडनम ् HAA see:ृ तः अ या शतो अध afeate G:feerarsat: ु वान ् द ःु ि थता गः Prarhea: पपा सतः बालो यवे गा त यजे ोगी च थन Te वFelृ ो अ Headedecsstarah T मै Azer ु म् Sex Sex —– the the person person should should avoid avoid the the woman woman who who is is not not lying lying with with her her face face upward, upward, who who is is in in her her menstrual menstrual period, period, who who is is not not liked, liked, whose whose activities activities are are displeasing, displeasing, whose whose private private parts parts are are dirty dirty and and who who is is troublesome; troublesome; who who is is very very obese obese or or very very emaciated, emaciated, who who has has recently recently delivered delivered and and who who is is pregnant; pregnant; The The other other woman woman (other (other than than his his wife), wife), and and the the nun, nun, the the other other animals animals like like the the goat, goat, buffalo buffalo etc., etc., should should be be avoided. avoided. Avoid Avoid sex sex in in the the abode abode of of the the teacher, teacher, gods gods and and kings kings in in monasteries, monasteries, burial burial ground, ground, places places of of torture torture and and of of sacrifice sacrifice and and meeting meeting of of four four roads. roads. Should Should avoid avoid days days of of special special significance significance (new-moon, (new-moon, full-moon, full-moon, eclipse, eclipse, festivals, festivals, mourning mourning days days and and others), others), Avoid Avoid organs organs which which are are non-sexual, non-sexual, (oral (oral etc) etc) and and also also the the days days forbidden forbidden for for sex, sex, avoid avoid violence violence during during sex. sex. Should Should not not indulge indulge in in sex sex after after aa heavy heavy meal, meal, without without keen keen intention, intention, when when hungry, hungry, when when his his body body is is in in uncomfortable uncomfortable postures, postures, when when thirsty; thirsty; with with children, children, with with the the aged aged (old (old women), women), when when troubled troubled by by other other urges urges (such (such as as of of urine, urine, faeces faeces etc.) etc.) and and when when he he is is himself himself aa patient. patient. 69-72. 69-72. सेवेत HAA: कामतः HA कामं Fat त ृ तो arshtpat वाजीकृतां fer हमे Vad यहा वस तशरदोः TWatqas प ा वषाfear: नदाघयोः WUelqdeecaetal: During During Hemanta Hemanta and and shishira shishira (winter) (winter) the the person person can can indulge indulge in in copulation copulation (daily) (daily) as as much much as as he he likes likes after after making making use use of of aphrodisiacs aphrodisiacs (and (and obtaining obtaining strength); strength); Page Page No. No. 113 113 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Once Once in in three three days days in in Vasanta Vasanta (spring) (spring) and and Sarat Sarat (autumn) (autumn) and and Once Once aa fortnight fortnight in in Varsha Varsha (rainy) (rainy) and and Nidagha Nidagha (summer). (summer). 73. 73. THTATA leAIaeM AAA: म लमोSCदौब यबलधािcae वि य याः अपवमरणं याद यथा ग छतः िRasy यम ् SUGAR FTच CAeegM wesd: Giddiness, Giddiness, exhaustion, exhaustion, weakness weakness of of the the thighs, thighs, loss loss of of strength, strength, depletion depletion of of tissues, tissues, loss loss of of acuity acuity of of senses senses and and premature premature death death occur occur from from improper improper indulgence indulgence in in the the woman woman (sexual (sexual intercourse). intercourse). 74. 74. म ृ तमेघायुरारो यपु ट ि ययशोबलैः ।अ धका Acca म दजरसो Aaled भवा त FAYीषु AAA: संयताः ॥Il ७५ Saale: (VT 6S ॥I Good Good memory, memory, intelligence, intelligence, long long life, life, health, health, nourishment, nourishment, acuity acuity of of sense sense organs, organs, reputation, reputation, strength strength and and slow slow ageing ageing accrue accrue from from disciplined disciplined (controlled) (controlled) indulgence indulgence in in the the women. women. 75. 75. नानानुलेपन हमा डखा Aयशीता बGI CAAT CA folनलख AUST MAF UAT: ुद ु धरसयूषसुरा स नाः से व े त चान शयनं वरतौ रत य त यै व माश वपष न धाम Aaa Del ु eset fact tara Tear ु aTy: Gate ु ः प ु रे त aT After After the the act, act, the the man man should should indulge indulge himself himself in in bath, bath, applying applying scented scented paste, paste, exposure exposure to to cool cool breeze, juice, soup, breeze, drinking drinking of of syrup syrup prepared prepared from from sugar sugar candy, candy, cold cold water, water, milk, milk, meat meat juice, soup, Sura Sura – — fermented fermented liquor liquor prepared prepared from from grains, grains, Prasanna Prasanna – — clear clear supernatant supernatant fluid fluid of of Sura Sura and and then then go go to to sleep; sleep; by by these, these, the the vigour vigour of of the the body body returns returns quickly quickly to to its its abode abode again. again. 76. 76. aeatta wagृ े कमद alge े दयालौ cert ुतच रत सम भषिज Rass नरनुब धं दे हार ां Praag नवे य Pes seat भव वपुलते जः Haftत fags: वा यक त भावः tareeachifctwera: वकुशलफलभोगी भ Tapers sfAareiPare: ू मपालि चरायःु The The king king who who has has implicitly implicitly reposed reposed the the protection protection of of his his body body with with his his physician, physician, who who is is well well conversant conversant with with the the scriptures scriptures and and its its practices practices efficient efficient in in work work and and kind, kind, attains attains great great valour, valour, health, health, fame, fame, influence, influence, capacity capacity to to enjoy enjoy the the fruits fruits of of all all his his actions actions and and a a long long life. life. 77. 77. Thus Thus ends ends the the 7th 7th chapter chapter of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hrudaya Hrudaya Sutrasthana. Sutrasthana. Page Page No. No. 114 114 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter ा शतीय अ याय Food Chapter 8 8 मा aArarfedra 3reara Food habits habits & & Indigestion Indigestion The The 8th 8th chapter chapter is is called called as as Matrashiteeya Matrashiteeya Adhyaya. Adhyaya. It It includes includes – — right right quantity quantity of of food food to to take, take, right right time time to to take take food, food, types types of of indigestion indigestion and and their their treatment, treatment, qualities qualities and and types types of of after after drinks, drinks, right right method method of of food food intake intake etc. etc. Right Right Amount Amount of of Food Food – — Aharamatra Aharamatra Apeksha: Apeksha: मा ाशी aaante सवकालं Aare या मा ा fFह अ व तका Farearay sect:नेः vatcenr मा या यपे ते ग लघू या प १¢ AMT ां qeaaated FRAY ु या प gyeAy ग2 ु णामधसौ ह c यं लघN ूनां ना ततCc ृ तता मा ा माणं friese न द टं Ta सुखं यावत वजीय त २2 Arama oad ् fasieife One One should should always always consume consume proper proper quantity quantity of of food. food. Right Right amount amount of of food food activates activates Agni Agni —– digestion digestion power power (which (which is is compared compared to to fire, fire, in in Ayurveda). Ayurveda). Food Food that that are are light light to to digest digest (laghu) (laghu) and and those those that that are are hard hard to to digest digest (Guru) (Guru) both both require require aa specified specified quantity quantity for for proper proper digestion. digestion. As As aa general general rule, rule, if if the the food food is is heavy heavy to to digest digest (such (such as as oily oily food, food, non non veg, veg, sweets sweets etc), etc), it it should should be be consumed consumed till till half half of of the the satiation satiation level level is is achieved. achieved. (Ardha (Ardha Sauhitya). Sauhitya). If If the the food food is is light light to to digest, digest, it it should should be be consumed consumed till till one one is is not not overly overly satiated. satiated. (Na (Na Ati Ati Truptata). Truptata). The The right right amount amount of of food food is is that, that, which which undergoes undergoes digestion digestion easily. easily. Effect Effect of of taking taking more more or or less less amount amount of of quantity quantity of of food food —– भोजनं नमा ं Iत ु न aloe हSaat a बलोपचयौजसे setvaatae सवषां वातरोगाणां SIat हे तुतां SAT ARAN प यते ३3 WIAA अ तमा ं प कोपयेत ् SMAATa Got: Aeterey ु दोषान areTe] ् eT ुनः सवानाश Consuming Consuming less less quantity quantity of of food food does does not not increase increase strength, strength, ojus ojus (immunity). (immunity). The The body body will will not not be be nourished nourished properly. properly. Over Over aa period period of of time, time, it it leads leads to to Vata Vata imbalance imbalance disorders. disorders. Excess Excess quantity quantity of of food food is is again again not not desirable. desirable. It It causes causes quick quick increase increase of of Doshas. Doshas. 3 3 – — 3½. 3’. Effects Effects of of over over eating: eating: पीsaat यमानो feह sates वाता या Bartectet युगप तेन HITAT: को पताः ४¥ आमे ना नेन Beat द ु टे न Acalaey तदे वा व य Hat कुवते MAcecta व ट भय तो Hoh अलसकं cAidaedt यावय तो faarrnry वसू चकाम ् 5५ fasersaed अधरो तरमागा यां AetaristaeHat: सहसैवािजता मनः RMA Page Page No. No. 115 115 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Due Due to to eating eating excess excess quantity quantity of of food, food, Vata Vata and and other other Doshas Doshas suddenly suddenly get get increased increased together together and and associating associating with with the the undigested undigested and and vitiated vitiated food food (Ama) (Ama) ,, produce produce diseases. diseases. It It causes causes Alasaka Alasaka disease disease by by blocking blocking the the movement movement of of food food inside inside the the alimentary alimentary tract tract and and Visuchika Visuchika (gastro (gastro enteritis) enteritis) by by expelling expelling out out the the undigested undigested food food in in both both downward downward and and upward upward directions directions (diarrhoea (diarrhoea and and vomiting) vomiting) simultaneously. simultaneously. This This is is seen seen in in persons persons who who are are not not self self controlled controlled and and who who can can not not control control their their craze craze for for eating. eating. 4-5. 4-5. Alasaka Alasaka —– indigestion indigestion + + constipation: constipation: या त ated नो व aicdieaent नाध तादाहारो न wae 7 चoT पceaयते ©६ STAI Horstepeda आमाशये अलसीभत सो sents: अलसकः FAA: मत ू तेन BT ृ ः Food Food neither neither comes comes out out in in the the upper upper route route by by vomiting vomiting nor nor from from the the downward downward route route by by purgation. purgation. Nor Nor does does itit undergo undergo digestion digestion in in the the stomach. stomach. It It stays stays in in the the stomach stomach lazily lazily (=Alasya). (=Alasya). Such Such aa disease disease condition condition is is called called as as Alasaka. Alasaka. 6. 6. Visuchika Visuchika ~ ~ Gastro Gastro enteritis enteritis व वधैः agatgdatearts वेदनो े दैवा वा द syerataa: भश fafad: ृ कोपतः ७ स व यती त ara वसू चका qfatitta araा ण eachie ू च भ रव गा Due Due to to sudden sudden and and profound profound aggravation aggravation Vata, Vata, along along with with other other Doshas, Doshas, the the person person experiences experiences pain pain in in entire entire body, body, as as though though being being pricked pricked by by needles, needles, hence hence this this disease disease is is called called Visuchika. Visuchika. (Suchi (Suchi means means needle). needle). Influence Influence of of different different Doshas Doshas in in Alasaka Alasaka and and Visuchika Visuchika -त श अ नलात ् ¢८ TA TAMA EPFCAFSTG A 3ifere ूल मानाहक प त भादयो पcdl, तात ् TRITAANecaaleqereraed: वरा तसारा तदाहत ृ लयादयः कफा छ य गगु तावाFAST स ग ठ TAGA: वनादयः &९ PHCGCUSTSAA In In Alasaka Alasaka and and Visuchika, Visuchika, If If Vata Vata is is aggravated, aggravated, it it causes causes Shoola Shoola —– adominal adominal pain pain Bhrama Bhrama —– Delusion Delusion Anaha bloating, fullness Anaha —–bloating, fullness Kampa Kampa —– tremors tremors Stambha stiffness etc Stambha —–stiffness etc symptoms. symptoms. If If Pitta Pitta is is aggravated, aggravated, itit causes causes Jvara Jvara – — fever fever Atisara Atisara —– diarrhoea, diarrhoea, dysentery dysentery Antardaha Antardaha —– internal internal burning burning sensation sensation Page Page No. No. 116 116 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Trut Trut —– excessive excessive thirst thirst Pralaya Pralaya – — panic, panic, unconsciousness unconsciousness If If Kapha Kapha is is aggravated, aggravated, it it causes causes Chardi Chardi—– Vomiting Vomiting Angaguruta Angaguruta -- heaviness heaviness of of the the body body Vak Vak Sangha Sangha – — Difficulty Difficulty to to speak speak Shteevana Shteevana – — excessive excessive salivation, salivation, expectoration expectoration and and spitting spitting Manifestation Manifestation of of Alasaka Alasaka symptoms: symptoms: TaeTeg वशेषा दsore ब पव नेsaTaaReT: वग वधा रणः ु ल या rdeel पी डतं मा तेना नं शले मणा BEAT म तरा १० isa Aredaleat AISAUT vo अलसं ो भतं दोषै य वेनैव सं ि थतम ् sore ata ae: ः श ereacdeta Beara श कु ते ती ां छ अतीसारविजतान ् ११ Yelclel cAaeskescranatstarey 88 ूलाद न ् Hed सो AY अलसः sere: Alasaka Alasaka occurs occurs especially especially in in those those who who are are weak, weak, who who have have low low digestion digestion strength strength and and who who suppress suppress urges urges of of the the body, body, habitually. habitually. In In them, them, Vata Vata gets gets increased, increased, gets gets associated associated with with Kapha Kapha to to obstruct obstruct the the movement movement of of undigested undigested food food in in the the digestive digestive tract. tract. It It causes causes the the food food to to stay stay inside inside the the stomach, stomach, as as aa foreign foreign body. body. It It leads leads to to abdominal abdominal colic colic and and such such other other symptoms, symptoms, but but without – 11. without vomiting vomiting and and diarrhea. diarrhea. 10 10-11. Dandalasaka Dandalasaka —– अ यथद ु टा तु दोषा द ु टा भब खाः या तय तनुं सवा द डवत ् tarsraied त भयि त चे ued:तः feted Hat qusad Uaत ् १२ et द डकालसकं AA नाम तं ये जेदाषुका रणम ् CUSHATH ct AITHOTL Highly Highly vitiated vitiated Doshas, Doshas, move move into into vitiated vitiated and and obstructed obstructed channels channels by by accumulation accumulation of of undigested undigested food. food. Thus Thus Doshas Doshas get get obstructed obstructed in in the the GI GI tract, tract, and and begin begin to to move move in in other other unnatural unnatural channels. channels. Thus Thus Doshas Doshas spread spread throughout throughout the the body body and and make make it it stiff stiff like like aa log log of of wood. wood. This This disease disease is is called called Dandakalasaka, Dandakalasaka, which which should should be be rejected rejected for for treatment treatment as as it it is is quick quick in in causing causing death. death. 12. 12. Ama Ama Dosha Dosha व अ यशनाजीणशी लनो faverarorey वषल णम ् १३ fave steaerershviehicren ¢3 ; fara आमदोषं महाघोरं वजये वषसं कम ् वष पाशुका र वात ् Tee व ोप म वतः १४ faywarepieaid ImAcHa: ¢¥ Persons Persons who who indulges indulges in in Viruddha Viruddha Ashana Ashana – — taking taking incompatible incompatible foods, foods, Page Page No. No. 117 117 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Adhyashana Adhyashana – — taking taking excess excess food food Ajeerna Ajeerna Ashana Ashana – — Eating Eating over over undigested undigested food, food, develops develops the the dreaded dreaded Amadosa Amadosa which which is is similar similar to to poison. poison. Hence Hence itit is is also also called called as as Amavisha Amavisha (undigested (undigested food food poison). poison). Such Such aa person person should should be be refused refused for for treatment treatment because because of of its its similarity similarity with with poison, poison, quickness quickness in in causing causing death death and and requiring requiring treatments treatments of of opposite opposite nature nature to to one one another another Doshas Doshas and and qualities. qualities. 13 13 –— 14. 14, Treatment Treatment of of Alasak Alasak अथ आमंsore अलसीभूतं Wea सा यं daRag तव रतमicra 3 STA ुि लखेत ् पी वा Manes! सो ापटुफलं avgeul वायु णं atswecta योजये ततः १५ ican gy वेदनं फलव Glee hotels)त च a मलवातान stoke cecelatefl ुलोमनीम ् ना यमाना न चा गा न भ श ं ि व ना न १६ वे टये त ् ATA Usa yetृ feaeetier 96 avedd Ama Ama – — undigested undigested food food stagnating stagnating inside inside the the Gastro Gastro intestinal intestinal tract tract should should be be removed removed quickly quickly after after deciding deciding the the conditions conditions of of easy easy management. management. The The person person is is made made to to drink drink warm warm water water mixed mixed with with powder powder of of Ugra Ugra (Vacha (Vacha —– Acorus Acorus calamus), calamus), Patu Patu (Saindhava (Saindhava – — Black Black Salt) Salt) and and Phala Phala (Madanaphala); (Madanaphala); This This will will cause cause vomiting; vomiting; This This therapy therapy is is followed followed up up with with Swedana Swedana (sudation (sudation therapy) therapy) Next, Next, Phalavarti Phalavarti (rectal (rectal suppositories) suppositories) prepared prepared from from fruits fruits which which help help downward downward movement movement of of feaces feaces and and flatus flatus should should be be administered, administered, The The parts parts of of the the body body which which are are rigid rigid should should be be well well fomented fomented and and then then wrapped wrapped with with cloth. cloth. 15 15 —– 16. 16. Treatment Treatment of of Vishucika Vishucika fant afcqerat orsvat: वसू यां अ तव ृ ायां पा य ः ate: दाहः weed श यते तद चोपवा यैनं faRedad व र तवत ् उपाचरे aeeeduareta Sorayaत ् १७ vb In In advanced advanced stage stage of of Visucika, Visucika, branding branding by by fire fire over over the the heel, heel, is is recommended. recommended. The The patient patient should should be be made made to to fast fast on on that that day day and and taken taken care care of of as as the the one one who who has has undergone undergone purgation purgation therapy. therapy. All All the the post post Virechana Virechana procedure procedure and and treatment treatment should should be be given given to to the the patient. patient. 17. 17. Aama Aama Dosha Dosha Chikitsa Chikitsa ती ा तर प arstefl नाजीण fasta पबे त efereat औषधम ् ् शूल नं sitseray Ara आमस नो Hotell अनलो Ale नालं पrdतarstyenerctiey ् 18 HAGA ुं दोषौषधाशनम 18 नह याद प daw चेतषां fas: व मः सहसाआत fergrarety ASATुरम ् The The patient patient of of indigestion indigestion though though having having severe severe abdominal abdominal pain pain should should not not take take pain pain killing killing drugs; drugs; the the Agni Agni – — digestive digestive fire fire which which is is associated associated with with Ama Ama – — improperly improperly processed processed metabolites metabolites Page Page No. No. 118 118 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan will will not not be be able able to to digest digest the the Doshas, Doshas, drugs drugs and and food; food; the the severe severe troubles troubles arising arising from from these these three three will will soon soon kill kill the the patient. patient. 18. 18. sorted तFAVS जीणाशने यु यात EtssspHar ् त धगु दरे ु भेष यं BrsUd दोषशेष य पाकाथम धु णाय च awNIET wresaset:नः स Heyes 7 After After the the food food is is found found digested, digested, if if stiffness stiffness and and heaviness heaviness of of the the abdomen abdomen persisting, persisting, then then the the medicines medicines should should be be given given to to digest digest the the residue residue Doshas Doshas and and to to stimulate stimulate the the Agni Agni—– digestive digestive power. power. 19. 19. शाि तराम वकाराणां भव अपतपणात ् Mean sataत Jतु aA दोषे aeusher त समी य yatta योजये त ् Af वधं AAवधे ce Diseases Diseases produced produced by by Ama Ama —– undigested undigested food, food, become become relieved relieved by by Apatarpana Apatarpana (non(nonnourishment); nourishment); three three kinds kinds of of Apatarpana, Apatarpana, appropriate appropriate to to the the three three Doshas Doshas should should be be adopted adopted after after careful careful consideration consideration of of all all aspects. aspects. 20. 20. त ा पे Aste ल घनं प ल घन WA पाचनम ् Aared Ua,यं, म ACYये Ase भूते शोधनं त Agr मूलाद ु मूलaeHaey ये मलान ् WIT Meet, , Ae If If Ama Ama is is little, little, only only Langhana Langhana (fasting) (fasting) will will be be suitable, suitable, If If itit is is moderate moderate Langhana Langhana (fasting) (fasting) and and Pachana Pachana – — digestive digestive drugs drugs are are needed; needed; if if itit is is severe, severe, then then Shodhana Shodhana (purification (purification Panchakarma Panchakarma therapy) therapy) is is necessary; necessary; for for these these will will expel expel out out the the Dosha Dosha and and Ama Ama from from the the very very root. root. 21. 21. Treatment Treatment principle principle for for diseases diseases Even Even the the other other diseases diseases should should be be treated treated by by adopting adopting treatments treatments which which are are opposite opposite of of their their causative causative factors. factors. It It is is called called as as Hetu Hetu Viparyaya Viparyaya Chikitsa. Chikitsa. Hetu Hetu means means causative causative factors. factors. If, If, however, however, the the diseases diseases reoccur reoccur or or persist persist for for long long time time then then the the Hetu Hetu Viparyaya Viparyaya should should be be given given up up and and disease disease specific specific treatment treatment should should be be adopted. adopted. It It is is called called as as Vyadhi Vyadhi Viparyaya Viparyaya Chikitsa. Chikitsa. तदथकार a, वा, पvedवे ale दोषे feat ि व े च पावके aexent aT wah हतम य aA जन ने हपानब या द य Casas STAGE Blea: ुि ततः Or Or Tadarthakari Tadarthakari Chikitsa Chikitsa (therapies (therapies which, which, though though not not actually actually opposite opposite of of either either the the cause cause or or the the diseases diseases still still produce produce the the desired desired result) result) should should be be adopted; adopted; When When the the Doshas Doshas have have returned returned to to normal, normal, when when the the Ama Ama is is completely completely relieved, relieved, when when digestion digestion activity activity is is completely completely restored restored to to normalcy, normalcy, then then oil-bath, oil-bath, drinking drinking of of oil oil (oleation (oleation therapies) therapies) and and enema enema therapy, therapy, etc. etc. should should be be administered administered appropriately. appropriately. To To gain gain the the lost lost strength strength in in the the patient. patient. 22-24. 22-24, Page Page No. No. 119 119 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Ajirna different kinds Ajirna Bheda Bheda —–different kinds ofof indigestion indigestion – — soltet aT piper aiferaesat: अजीण च कफादाम aa त aitcHr शोफो अ ग डयोः स योभु त इवो गारः TeMara Salas: सेको लेशगौरवम25 ् 25 WaHlereeaikar Vitiation Vitiation of of Kapha Kapha causes causes ”Ama ”Ama Ajeerna” Ajeerna” It It is is characterized characterized with with swelling swelling of of the the eyes eyes socket socket and and cheeks, cheeks, belching belching similar similar to to those those which which come come up up immediately immediately after after meals, meals, excess excess salivation, salivation, nausea nausea and and heaviness heaviness of of the the body. body. 25 25 व ट धं afore अ नलात ् शorूल faaeer वब ध seAeTaehd आ मानसादकृत ् fasestt Vishthabdha Vishthabdha ajirna ajirna -- this this type type of of indigestion indigestion is is caused caused due due to to vitiated vitiated Vata Vata and and is is characterized characterized by by pain pain in in the the abdomen, abdomen, constipation, constipation, flatulence flatulence and and debility. debility. प तात ् वद धं त ृ मोह मा लो गारदाहवत ् Vidagdha Vidagdha ajirna ajirna -- this this type type of of indigestion indigestion is is due due to to vitiated vitiated Pitta Pitta and and has has thirst, thirst, fainting, fainting, dizziness, dizziness, giddiness, giddiness, sour sour belching belching and and burning burning sensation sensation as as its its symptoms. symptoms. 26 26 Ajirna Ajirna Chikitsa Chikitsa -- Treatment Treatment of of Indigestion Indigestion ल घनं कायमामे त ु, fasestl व ट धे Tdast वेदनं भ श asa HAA q, ayerey ृ म् वद धे qaa, वमनं , य हतं भवे faastl Yaarवा यथाव Baracaथं fed Hdत ् २७ Ww For fasting should For Ama Ama ajirna, ajirna, Langhana Langhana – — fasting should be be done;| done;| For For Vishtabdha Vishtabdha Ajirna, Ajirna, Swedana Swedana (sudation (sudation therapy) therapy) should should be be done; done; For For Vidagdha Vidagdha ajirna, ajirna, Vamana Vamana (emesis (emesis therapy) therapy) should should be be done, done, or or any any therapy therapy appropriate appropriate to to the the stage stage of of the the disease disease can can be be done. done. 27 27 Vilambika Vilambika disease: disease: INA saecitatarared गर यसो भवे ल नादामादे व feat वलि eset बका कफवातान ल गा त समसाधना 28 PHAM]T STASI ACHAAU 28 ुब ा आम Vilambika Vilambika – — another another kind kind of of indigestion indigestion occurs occurs due due to to profound profound accumulation accumulation of of Ama Ama inside inside the the channels. channels. It It is is caused caused due due to to vitiation vitiation of of Kapha Kapha and and Vata, Vata, and and has has all all the the symptoms symptoms of of Ama; Ama; its its treatment treatment also also is is similar similar to to that that of of Ama. Ama. 28 28 Page Page No. No. 120 120 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Rasashesha Rasashesha Ajeerna Ajeerna -another -another type type of of indigestion indigestion HIST ा अ FEACAM MSH SET TANIA: दय यथा श गारे रसशे षतः ु ेअ प उ शयीत कि चदे वा aaearenteat सव चाना शतो fear दवा २९ eit fatracarst 28 व यादजीण , wim स जातबVat याि मतं लघ ुभु ो अ HeaMieAd ay ु Rasashesha Rasashesha ajeerna ajeerna -- Lack Lack of of enthusiasm, enthusiasm, discomfort discomfort in in the the region region of of the the heart heart in in spite spite of of pure pure belching belching are are the the features features of of Rasashesha Rasashesha ajirna ajirna – — another another kind kind of of indigestion. indigestion. Such Such aa person person should should sleep sleep for for some some time time during during day day without without eating eating anything. anything. Patient Patient of of indigestion indigestion of of any any type type should should sleep sleep during during day day without without taking taking any any food, food, later, later, when when he he develops develops hunger hunger he he should should eat eat little little quantity quantity of of easily easily digestible digestible food. food. 28½ 28’ – — 29 29 Ajirna Ajirna Samanya Samanya Laksana Laksana – — general general symptoms symptoms of of indigestion:indigestion:वब धोअ त विृ तवा tonirAeayca ला नमा तमूढता ३० faaearaiaugicdat 3° अजीण ल गं सामा यं व ट भो गौरवं मः Diarrhea Diarrhea or or constipation, constipation, exhaustion, exhaustion, inactivity inactivity of of Vata, Vata, distension distension of of the the abdomen, abdomen, feeling feeling of of heaviness heaviness and and dizziness dizziness are are the the general general symptoms symptoms of of Ajirna Ajirna (indigestion). (indigestion). 30 30 Ajirna other causes Ajirna Anyakaranani Anyakaranani —–other causes of of indigestion indigestion न तमा मेवा नमामदोषाय क े वलम ् a चा UiaasAdeaAAeINT Hac व ट वि टि भद धामगु हमाशु च afascfatsefrareserraewarieAneitel वदा ह श कम य ब ल त ं चा नं न faane (aad Test @ जीय siteत ु ु ु SIAC AT शोक elrensplerazarie उपत तेन भु Aतं च ोध ुदा दfar: भः Consuming Consuming large large quantity quantity of of food food is is not not the the only only cause cause for for production production of of Ama Ama Dosha; Dosha; foods foods which which are are disliked, disliked, which which cause cause flatulence, flatulence, which which are are over-cooked over-cooked or or uncooked, uncooked, which which are are not not easily easily digestible, digestible, which which are are dry, dry, very very cold, cold, dirty dirty (contaminated), (contaminated), which which cause cause burning burning sensation sensation during during digestion, digestion, which which are are dried dried up up or or soaked soaked in in more more water, water, do do not not undergo undergo proper proper digestion; digestion; so so also also the the food food consumed consumed by by persons persons afflicted afflicted with with grief, grief, anger, anger, excess excess hunger hunger etc. etc. 3131- 32½ 32/4 Dushta Dushta Ashana Ashana —– bad bad food food habits: habits: म ं GaAs प यमप यं च भु तं समशनं मतम ् fat TAM ATA व याद यशनं HATHA भूयोभु त योप र silstete भोजनम ् FACATGEAe अकाले IE बहु Tet चा पं वा भु तं त वषमाशनम ् Hare a yea _ ु TATA ी य येता न Aes म ृ युं aवा Gel घोरान ् careheyoiied याधी सज Hoatarest ृ ि तayवा Page Page No. No. 121 121 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Consuming Consuming suitable suitable and and unsuitable unsuitable foods foods mixed mixed together together is is known known as as Samashana, Samashana, Consuming Consuming large large quantity quantity of of food food even even before before the the previous previous meal meal is is digested digested constitutes constitutes Adhyasana, Adhyasana, Consuming Consuming less less or or more more quantity quantity at at improper improper time time is is Vishamashana, Vishamashana, -- all all these these three three either either cause cause death death or or dreaded dreaded diseases. diseases. 33 33 – — 34 34 Ahara Ahara vidhi vidhi —– regimen regimen of of diet diet —– काले Bees सा यं श हतं feasareot ि न धो णं लघ त मनाः aret ofa TY ु AeHel: ु च fect ष सं मधुर ायं ना त त ु वलि भतम ् Tard: neater: नातः atetel ु ान ् fafaaeat व व त थो eblaare धौतपादकराननः तप य वा पतन ् दे वान तथीन ् बालकान ् गु न ् यवे य Taree तर च3a अ प wfaqeaa तप नपhaere र हान ् yeraen समी य TEMA स यगा म नभ ielegeay न द नभुव वम ् THe selन ् GIA इ ट म टैः Ugrailareg सहा ीया छुtelstra चभ तजना dy तम ् ssefase: Kale Kale Satmyam Satmyam -- Food Food should should be be consumed consumed at at the the proper proper time, time, Shuchi Shuchi Hitam Hitam – — itit should should be be the the accustomed, accustomed, clean, clean, suited suited to to health, health, Snigdha, Snigdha, Ushna, Ushna, Laghu Laghu —– unctuous, unctuous, hot hot and and easily easily digestible; digestible; Tanmanaa Tanmanaa —– consuming consuming food food with with due due attention attention Shadrasa, Shadrasa, Madhurapraayam Madhurapraayam —– should should contain contain all all the the six six tastes tastes with with predominance predominance of of sweet sweet taste, taste, Na Na Atidruta, Atidruta, Vilambitam Vilambitam – — partaken partaken neither neither very very quickly quickly nor nor very very slowly; slowly; Snataha after taking Snataha – — after taking bath, bath, Kshut Kshut vaan vaan – — after after having having good good hunger, hunger, Viviktastha Viviktastha -sitting -sitting in in solitude, solitude, Dhauta after washing Dhauta Pada Pada kara kara aananaha aananaha – — after washing the the feet, feet, hands hands and and face, face, Tarpayitva after satisfying Tarpayitva pitrun, pitrun, Devan, Devan, Atitheen, Atitheen, Balakaan, Balakaan, Guroon Guroon – — after satisfying the the Pitrus Pitrus (manes), (manes), gods, gods, guests, guests, children children and and Guru. Guru. After After satisfying satisfying even even the the dependents dependents maintained maintained in in the the house house (such (such as as servants, servants, horses horses and and other other animals animals for for receiving receiving service, service, parrots parrots and and other other pets pets etc.), etc.), after after carefully carefully considering considering one’s one’s own own constitution, constitution, likes likes and and dislikes, dislikes, without without scolding scolding // abusing abusing the the food, food, without without too too much much of of talk; talk; should should partake partake more more of of liquid liquid food, food, that that which which is is liked, liked, in in the the company company of of the the liked liked persons, persons, and and served served by by those those who who are are clean clean and and faithful faithful to to him. him. 35 35 —– 38 38 भोजनं त ण पुनः sate TUM ase ु टमु णीकृतं Yat: ृ केषा दज शाकावरा नभू य ठम यु णलवणं Aa यजेत ् MHA AISA Food Food which which is is contaminated contaminated with with grass, grass, hairs hairs etc; etc; re-heated, re-heated, which which consists consists more more of of vegetables vegetables and and undesirable undesirable grains, grains, which which is is very very hot hot and and very very salty salty should should be be rejected. rejected. 39 39 Page Page No. No. 122 122 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Food Food that that should should not not be be consumed consumed habitually habitually -कलाटद धक ारशु aA ताममAHA froea pel HreaRels ू चीका ूलकम ् क शश कवराहा वगोम यभ हषा मषम ् P| SHAS aA AMS MATA ु ृ माषferन Sora पावशाल ATV asedechA HAA ूक वस प टवी ढकम ् श कशाका न यवकान UAMPe Tale ् फा Htणतं च Tatन शीलये ereत ् ु Kilata Kilata (dairy (dairy product product – — sweet sweet in in taste), taste), Dadhi Dadhi – — Curds, Curds, Kuchika Kuchika (solid (solid part part of of curds), curds), Kshara Kshara (alkalies), (alkalies), Sukta Sukta (fermented (fermented gruel), gruel), Ama Ama Mulaka Mulaka – — Uncooked Uncooked radish, radish, Meat Meat of of animals animals which which are are emaciated, emaciated, dry dry meat, meat, meat meat of of the the boar, boar, sheep, sheep, cow, cow, fish fish and and buffalo, buffalo, Masha Masha (black (black gram), gram), Nishpava; Nishpava; Saluka, Saluka, Bisa, Bisa, Pista Pista (powdery, (powdery, starchy), starchy), germinated germinated grains, grains, dried dried vegetables, vegetables, Yavaka Yavaka (small (small barley), barley), Phanita Phanita (half (half cooked cooked molasses) molasses) —– those those should should not not be be consumed consumed habitually. habitually. 40 40 —– 41. 41. Pathya Pathya – — food food that that can can be be consumed consumed habitually habitually (on (on daily daily basis, basis, for for aa long long time) time) – — शीलये छा लगोध टकजा eter MypAAI oS गलम ् ूमयवषिSep स तीबालमx ूलवाeaतSN क OiearswerHpahlae ु नष णकजीव dare ु म् प मु गशकराः ayयामलकम storensje ृ वीकापटोल Rene agar घ त Ydtecateansixatcasateaay ृ द योदक ीर ौ दा डमसै धवम ् Shali Shali (rice), (rice), Godhuma Godhuma (wheat), (wheat), Yava Yava – — Barley Barley – — Hordeum Hordeum vulgare, vulgare, Shashtika Shashtika (rice (rice maturing maturing in in sixty sixty days), days), Jangala Jangala (meat (meat of of animals animals of of desert desert like like lands), lands), sunisannaka, sunisannaka, Jivanti Jivanti – — Leptadenia Leptadenia reticulata, reticulata, Balamulaka Balamulaka (young (young radish), radish), Pathya Pathya (Haritaki) (Haritaki) Amalaka Amalaka (Amla (Amla – — Indian Indian gooseberry), gooseberry), Mridwika Mridwika —– dry dry grapes, grapes, Mudga Mudga – — green green gram, gram, Sarkara Sarkara (sugar), (sugar), Ghrita Ghrita (ghee), (ghee), Divyodaka Divyodaka (rain (rain water water or or pure pure water), water), Ksheera Ksheera (milk), (milk), Kshoudra Kshoudra (honey), (honey), Dadima Dadima —– Pomegranate Pomegranate -- Punica Punica granatum granatum and and Saindhava Saindhava – — Rock Rock Salt Salt (salt) (salt) can can be be consumed consumed habitually. habitually. 42 42 – — 43. 43. Page Page No. No. 123 123 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan फलां ayateat मधुस प या fete न श ने बलाय aTच fet tasers वा यानव ि तक य च रोगो छे दकरं Tच यत Fareaeddicdpeued waiedant Ud ् ु ृ ृ Triphala Triphala along along with with honey honey and and ghee ghee should should be be consumed consumed at at nights nights daily daily for for strengthening strengthening of of eye eye sight. sight. Any Any other other thing thing which which is is good good for for promoting/maintaining promoting/maintaining health health and and dispelling dispelling diseases diseases can can also also be be consumed consumed habitually. habitually. 43½. 43’. Food Food that that should should be be consumed consumed at at the the beginning beginning of of meal meal —– बसे ुमोचचोचा are मोदको का रका दकम fasaararararar picnic ha ् अ या यं ग ु ि न धं वाद ु म दं ि थरं पुरः वपर तमत चा ते Ae म ये अ ललवणोतकटम ् fantardeded AeaaeaiaHcA Foods fatty, sweet, Foods which which are are not not easily easily digestible, digestible, which which are are unctuous unctuous – — fatty, sweet, slow slow and and hard hard such such as as Bisa, Bisa, Ikshu Ikshu (sugarcane), (sugarcane), Mocha, Mocha, Coca, Coca, Amra Amra (mango), (mango), Modaka Modaka (sweet (sweet meat meat ball), ball), Utkarika Utkarika (sweet (sweet dish) dish) etc., etc., should should be be consumed consumed at at the the commencement commencement of of the the meal. meal. foods foods of of opposite opposite qualities, qualities, at at the the end end of of the the meal, meal, and and those those which which are are predominantly predominantly sour sour and and salt, salt, in in the the middle middle of of the the meal. meal. 45 45 – — 45½. 4514. Hest Hattaieit अ नेन क वाशौ welt पानेनैकं ु TAA पूरये त ् आ थ HS यं पवनाद Taeनां चत Tea ु मवशे षयेत ् Two Two parts parts of of the the stomach stomach (half (half of of its its capacity) capacity) should should be be filled filled with with solid solid foods, foods, one one part part by by liquids liquids and and the the remaining remaining one one part part should should be be kept kept vacant vacant for for accommodating accommodating air air etc. etc. 46 46 Anupana (after –— drink) Anupana —–(after drink) ::अनुपानं हमं वा र यवगोधूमयो हतम ् दि न म ये वषे ौ े को णं प टमयेषु तु शाकम म त3 त जकम~ ् THAaMelthal ु गा द वक ु ा लकािash ृ तौ AFdcaHroH g a+ Cc स पु याथ,Fao थूलानां ¢टु मध OTुरा क PMT AYSHA ूदकम ् ृ शानां Years शोषे सरसो, म व पे च ane मां Aa, Acaयं मां AMसे Faetd wT पावक aah े qreatyencaanses rA AHA:भः या यौषधा वभा य TAS ील घनातपकम ीणे व बाले च पयः प यथा AAA अमत afer Ggृ े च U Sel UT Ue: Weeयं Beat ृ म् Cold Cold water water is is the the ideal ideal after-drink after-drink (Anupana) (Anupana) – — after after meals meals containing/ containing/ prepared prepared from from Yava Yava – — (Barley) (Barley) and and Godhuma Godhuma —– wheat, wheat, after after consuming consuming Dadhi Dadhi – — Curds Curds // yoghurt, yoghurt, wine, wine, poison poison and and honey. honey. Page Page No. No. 124 124 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Warm Warm water water is is ideal ideal after-drink after-drink for for foods foods which which are are starchy, starchy, Mastu Mastu —– Supernatent Supernatent liquid liquid of of curds curds (whey), (whey), Takra Takra (diluted (diluted buttermilk) buttermilk) Amla Amla kanjika kanjika (fermented (fermented gruel); gruel); dishes dishes prepared prepared from from vegetables vegetables and and Mudga Mudga (green (green gram) gram) and and other other legumes legumes :: Sura Sura (beer) (beer) is is the the ideal ideal after after drink drink for for lean lean person. person. Honey Honey mixed mixed water water is is the the ideal ideal after after drink drink for for obese obese person. person. Meat Meat soup soup is is good good after after drink drink for for the the emaciated, emaciated, Wines Wines are are ideal ideal after after aa meal meal of of meat meat and and to to those those who who have have poor poor digestive digestive capacity; capacity; Milk just as Milk is is best best suited suited just as nector nector for for those those who who are are debilitated debilitated by by diseases, diseases, medicines medicines (and (and therapies), therapies), walking walking long long distances, distances, speaking, speaking, sexual sexual intercourse, intercourse, fasting, fasting, exposure exposure to to sun sun and and such such other other tiresome tiresome activities; activities; for for the the emaciated, emaciated, the the aged, aged, and and children. children. 47 47 – — 50. 50. An An ideal ideal Anupana Anupana वपर तं qeraey यद न य act: गुणःै Earefanreay याद वरो ध aच fawtd अनप समासेन , Adel सवदा TTA त श यते HAT ु ानं PAA, An after-drink) is An ideal ideal Anupana Anupana (( after-drink) is that that which which has has properties properties opposite opposite of of those those of of the the foods foods but but not not incompatible incompatible with with them; them; such such an an afterafter- drink drink is is always always valuable. valuable. 51. 51. Benefits Benefits of of Anupana: Anupana: अनुपानं करो यूजा तिृ तं याि तं ढा गताम ् अ नस घातशै थ य वि लि तजरणा ayन Tच HeoasaiAewaiatedaNoM Anupana after —– drink Anupana —–after drink invigorates, invigorates, gives gives contentment, contentment, helps helps proper proper movement movement of of food food inside, inside, stability stability of of the the body body parts; parts; loosening loosening of of hard hard masses masses of of food, food, their their proper proper liquification liquification (moistening) (moistening) and and digestion. digestion. 52. 52. Contra Contra indication indication for for Anupana Anupana —– नो वज ुगद वासकासोरः AAT ATA: aT तपीनसे ATTA गीतभा य गे Tच Cave वरभे दे Tच afeda त तम ् Aas It It is is not not good good in in diseases diseases of of the the organs organs above above the the shoulders shoulders (ear, (ear, nose, nose, throat, throat, eyes eyes and and brain brain related related diseases), diseases), dyspnoea dyspnoea (COPD, (COPD, Asthma), Asthma), cough, cough, injury injury to to chest chest (lungs), (lungs), rhinitis, rhinitis, for for those those engaged engaged in in singing singing and and speaking speaking and and in in hoarseness hoarseness of of voice. voice. 53. 53. ि ल नदेCASEI हमेहा गलरोग णातरु ाः WieForeeie TR TATACTIT: पानं यजेय2 ुः Wat cao: Page Page No. No. 125 125 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Drinking Drinking liquids liquids should should be be avoided avoided by by those those who who are are over-hydrated, over-hydrated, who who are are suffering suffering from from polyuria, polyuria, diseases diseases of of the the eyes eyes and and throat, throat, and and wounds wounds (ulcers). (ulcers). 54. 54. All All persons persons – — both both healthy healthy and and sick sick should should avoid avoid speaking, speaking, walking walking long long distances distances and and sleeping sleeping immediately immediately after after consuming consuming liquids; liquids; exposure exposure to to sun sun and and fire, fire, travel travel in in vehicles, vehicles, swimming swimming and and riding riding on on animals animals soon soon after after consuming consuming food. food. 54½. 54’. Ahara Ahara kala kala – — proper proper time time of of meals:meals:The The ideal ideal time time for for taking taking meals meals is is after after the the elimination elimination of of feaces feaces and and urine, urine, when when the the mind mind is is clean clean (devoid (devoid of of emotions), emotions), when when the the Doshas Doshas are are moving moving in in their their natural natural paths paths (functioning (functioning normally), normally), when when belching belching are are pure pure without without and and foul foul smell smell or or taste, taste, when when hunger hunger is is well well manifest, manifest, when when the the flatus flatus is is moving moving downward downward easily, easily, when when the the digestive digestive activity activity is is keen, keen, when when the the sense sense organs organs are are clear clear functioning, functioning, when when the the body body is is light. light. Food Food should should be be consumed consumed observing observing the the rules tules and and procedures procedures of of taking taking food. food. That That is is the the ideal ideal time. time. 54 54 —– 55. 55. Thus Thus ends ends the the chapter chapter called called Matrashitiya, Matrashitiya, the the eighth eighth in in the the Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Astangahrdaya Astangahrdaya Samhita. Samhita. Page Page No. No. 126 126 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter या द व ानीय Chapter 9 9 Dravyadi Dravyadi Vigyaniya Vigyaniya gearfefaenetta The The 9th 9th chapter chapter of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hrudaya Hrudaya Sutrasthana Sutrasthana is is called called as as Dravyadi Dravyadi Vijnaneeya Vijnaneeya Adhayaya. Adhayaya. It It explains explains about about substances substances and and its its qualities, qualities, how how aa medicinal medicinal substance substance brings brings about about action action etc. etc. Importance Importance of of the the substance substance -- Dravya Dravya Pradhanya Pradhanya यमेवरसाद नां े ठं , Aते हतदा याः FAARAEATASS, ACTA: Dravya Dravya – — (substance (substance // mass mass of of the the substance) substance) is is the the most most important important factor factor among among Rasa Rasa (tastes) (tastes) and and other other qualities; qualities; because because all all of of these these qualities qualities are are residing residing in in the the substance substance only. only. प चभूता मकं तत Gach Ad ् Dravya/Mass Dravya/Mass is is composed composed of of five five basic basic elements. elements. त त ु माम ध ठाय जायते acdeATARISS saad HA AAA: अ भुयो UsAaaasa यि नपवननभसां समवायतः ति नविृ त वशेष च caret यपदे श तु भ Aeagiccareed FTA ूयसा It solidity as It has has Kshma Kshma —–solidity as its its substratum, substratum, it it takes takes origin origin from from Ambu Ambu (Ap (Ap Bhuta Bhuta —– water water element), element), Agni Agni (Tejas (Tejas Bhuta Bhuta —– Fire Fire element), element), Pavana Pavana (Vayu (Vayu Bhuta Bhuta —– air air element) element) and and Nabhas Nabhas (Akasha (Akasha Bhuta Bhuta —– ether ether element), element), with with their their intimate intimate and and inseparable inseparable combination. combination. Its Its identification/designation identification/designation is is decided decided by by the the predominance predominance of of particular particular element element in in the the Dravya Dravya (mass (mass // substance). substance). 1-2. 1-2. Notes Notes ::- Panchabhuta Panchabhuta refers refers to to five five basic basic elements elements —– Earth Earth (solid), (solid), Water, Water, Fire, Fire, Air Air and and Ether. Ether. As As per per aa philosophy, philosophy, called called as as Sankhya Sankhya philosophy, philosophy, every every substance substance on on earth earth is is composed composed of of these these five five basic basic elements, elements, in in different different proportions. proportions. The The dominant dominant part part of of the the basic basic element element decides decides the the nature nature of of the the substance. substance. Five Five Basic Basic elements elements —– Prithvi Prithvi —– Earth Earth – — Gandha Gandha (smell) (smell) is is the the special special quality, quality, Guru Guru (heaviness), (heaviness), Khara Khara (roughness), (roughness), Kathina Kathina (hard) (hard) etc etc are are its its general general qualities. qualities. Ap Ap —– Water Water – — Rasa Rasa (taste) (taste) is is its its special special quality, quality, Tejas Tejas – — Fire Fire – — Rupa Rupa (appearance) (appearance) is is its its special special quality quality Vayu Vayu – — Air Air – — Sparsha Sparsha (touch) (touch) is is its its special special quality quality Akasha Akasha —– Ether Ether – — Shabda Shabda (sound) (sound) is is its its special special quality quality Page Page No. No. 127 127 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan These These elements elements combine combine together together in in an an inseparable inseparable combination combination (Samavaya) (Samavaya) to to become become gross gross objects objects and and give give rise rise to to the the formation formation of of all all the the substances substances of of this this universe. universe. Hence Hence the the entire entire universe universe is is Panchabhautik Panchabhautik (composed (composed of of five five elements, elements, hence hence designated designated as as Prapancha). Prapancha). The The proportion/quantity proportion/quantity of of each each Bhuta Bhuta (element) (element) varies varies and and hence hence the the existence existence of of variety variety of of substances substances in in this this universe, universe, each each one one very very different different and and unique. unique. Whichever Whichever element element is is predominant predominant in in any any substance substance bestows bestows its its name name to to that that substance. substance. If If Prithvi Prithvi Bhuta Bhuta (earth (earth element) element) is is more more than than the the other other four four in in aa certain certain combination, combination, then then the the substance solid; substance the the gets gets formed formed is is called called Parthiva Parthiva – — solid; If liquid If Ap Ap Bhuta Bhuta (water (water element) element) is is dominant dominant – — then then Apya Apya – — liquid If If Tejas Tejas Bhuta Bhuta (fire (fire element) element) is is more, more, it it will will be be Taijasa Taijasa (Agneya), (Agneya), if if Vayu Vayu Bhuta Bhuta (air (air element) element) it it will will be be Vayavya, Vayavya, and and if if Akasabhuta Akasabhuta (space (space element) element) is is more, more, it it will will be be Akasheeya Akasheeya (Nabhasa). (Nabhasa). Thus Thus all all the the substances substances of of the the universe universe are are classified classified into into five five kinds. kinds. Rasa Rasa – — Anurasa Anurasa —– (Primary (Primary and and secondary secondary tastes) tastes) ::, a ARES : : त मा नैकरसं यं भत ू ास घातसंभवात ् नै कदोषा ततो रोगा amelie Weedत य तो रसः मत CAF CA: FAT: ृ ः 33 Taste Taste in in aa substance substance also also arises arises out out of of Pancha Pancha mahabhuta mahabhuta (5 (5 element) element) combination. combination. Hence, Hence, because because of of the the combination combination of of the the elements, elements, there there is is no no substance substance having having only only one one taste. taste. Similarly, Similarly, there there is is no no disease disease arising arising out out of of aa single single Dosha. Dosha. Any Any disease disease will will have have involvement involvement of of more more than than one one Dosha. Dosha. Taste Taste (rasa) (rasa) is is of of two two types. types. Primary Primary taste taste (Rasa) (Rasa) – — the the taste taste that that is is perceived perceived clearly. clearly. The The one one that that manifests manifests clearly clearly in in aa substance. substance. अ य तोअनुरसः raged कि चद ते cara य तोअ प चे यते HEAT: aad Secondary Secondary taste taste (Anurasa) (Anurasa) – — which which are are not not clearly clearly manifest manifest or or which which are are recognized recognized at at the the end. end. 3. 3. गव प ृ थ यादौ Tas रसा येy४ Tatas ु ादयोगुणा qedये yfeearat रसेषु capeeded यप द य ते साहचय पचारतः Wy Aesatrana: Guru Guru (heaviness) (heaviness) etc etc qualities qualities present present in in the the Prithvi Prithvi (earth) (earth) etc etc substances substances of of are are residing residing in in the the taste taste of of the the substance); substance); Qualities Qualities of of aa substance substance are are ascribed ascribed to to the the taste taste because because of of their their intimate intimate co-existence. co-existence. Page Page No. No. 128 128 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Qualities Qualities of of substances substances based based on on the the predominance predominance of of elements elements – — Qualities Qualities of of solid solid substances substances —– (Parthiva (Parthiva Dravya Dravya Laksana)Laksana)त aa थूल िFEAT थर ग ण Fesयं गWSु EY Teeध गFMEA ु ो बणम ् ५4 पा थवं गौरव थैय स घात उपचयावहम ufid aka Se sued sca ् Earth Earth has has – — Guru Guru (heaviness, (heaviness, heavy heavy to to digest), digest), Sthula Sthula (bulky), (bulky), Sthira Sthira (stable) (stable) and and Gandha Gandha (smell) (smell) qualities. qualities. Hence, Hence, substances substances that that have have Earth Earth as as the the predominant predominant element element (Parthiva (Parthiva Dravya) Dravya) have have Gaurava Gaurava (heaviness), (heaviness), Sthairya Sthairya (stability), (stability), Samghata Samghata (compactness) (compactness) and and well well nourished nourished qualities qualities —– 5 5 Qualities Qualities of of liquid liquid substances substances (Apya (Apya Dravya Dravya Laksana) Laksana) – — गु fears ि न ध Aeg म द Teg सा रसो बणम ् ६& oaव शीत eft We Caeser आ यं Teal नेहन faves व य द Fela लेद VES लाद TUT ब धकृत ् HCY Liquid Liquid element element has has Drava Drava (liquidity), (liquidity), Sheeta Sheeta (cold), (cold), Guru Guru (Heavy (Heavy to to digest), digest), Snigdha Snigdha (unctuous, (unctuous, oily, oily, moisture), moisture), Manda Manda (dull), (dull), Sandra Sandra (thickness, (thickness, dense) dense) and and rasa rasa (taste) (taste) qualities. qualities. Substances Substances containing containing liquid liquid as as predominant predominant element element (Apya (Apya Dravya) Dravya) have have Snehana Snehana (lubrication, (lubrication, moistness), moistness), Avishyanda Avishyanda (secretion, (secretion, moisture, moisture, production), production), Kleda Kleda (wetness), (wetness), Prahlada Prahlada (satiation, (satiation, contentment, contentment, satisfaction) satisfaction) and and Bandhakrut Bandhakrut (cohesion, (cohesion, binding, binding, holding holding together) together) qualities. qualities. 6. 6. Agneya Agneya Dravya Dravya Laksana Laksana —– (qualities (qualities of of Agneya Agneya substances) substances) ::णो ण faereqen वशदसू म Baelesory पगण wat ती chevisor ु ो बणम ् आ नेयं दाह वण VR काश Tel पचना cHH मकम ् Maat ale भा AT AV Agni Agni has has qualities qualities such such as as Ruksa Ruksa (dry), (dry), Teekshna Teekshna (penetrating, (penetrating, sharp), sharp), Ushna Ushna (hot), (hot), Vishada Vishada (non-slimy), (non-slimy), Sookshma Sookshma (minute) (minute) and and Rupa Rupa (appearance, (appearance, showing, showing, from) from) Substances Substances that that have have fire fire as as the the main main element element causes causes Daha Daha (burning (burning sensation), sensation), Bha Bha (luster), (luster), Varna Varna (expression (expression of of colour) colour) and and Pachana Pachana (( digestion, digestion, process process of of transformation, transformation, putrefaction putrefaction etc.) etc.) 7. 7. Qualities Qualities of of airy airy substances substances —– Vayaviya Vayaviya Dravya Dravya Laksana Laksana – — वाय aedयं वशद ay लघु Fase पशगण wartaere sry ् ु ो बणम रौ श य Tea वचार Tenet ला नकारकम ् tesय लाघव area वैdere Air Air has has Rooksha Rooksha (dry), (dry), Visada Visada (non-slimy, (non-slimy, clear), clear), Laghu Laghu (lightness) (lightness) and and Sparsha Sparsha (touch (touch tactile tactile sensation) sensation) qualities qualities Page Page No. No. 129 129 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Airy Airy substances substances posses posses qualities qualities such such as as Ruksa Ruksa (dry), (dry), it it produces produces dryness, dryness, Laghava Laghava (lightness), (lightness), Vaishadya Vaishadya (transparency, (transparency, clarity), clarity), Vichara Vichara (movements, (movements, different different kinds kinds of of activities) activities) and and exhaustion exhaustion 8. 8. Qualities Qualities of of ether ether dominant dominant substances substances —– Nabhasa Nabhasa Dravya Dravya Laksana:Laksana:नाभसं वशद AL लघु श दगण ae स Fea eqns ू म fare ु ो बणम ् सौ षय oreraenwa लाघवकरम ् Sea Ether Ether has has Sukshma Sukshma (minuteness), (minuteness), Vishada Vishada (transparence, (transparence, clarity), clarity), Laghu Laghu (lightness) (lightness) and and Shabda Shabda (sound, (sound, hearing) hearing) qualities. qualities. Substances Substances with with ether ether dominance dominance produce produce cavitation cavitation (hollowness) (hollowness) and and lightness lightness (weightlessness) (weightlessness) 99 Nothing Nothing is is non-medicinal:non-medicinal:जग येवमनौषधं saIaaHaAseT न कि चत faqud योगयोः १० a fairad act aes vo ् व यते setयं वशात ् नानाथ Beat: There There is is nothing nothing in in this this universe, universe, which which cannot cannot be be used used as as medicine.Knowledge medicine.Knowledge and and purpose purpose of of each each substance substance is is required required to to use use any any substance substance as as medicine. medicine. 10. 10. Properties Properties of of Dravyas Dravyas यमू वगमं त पवनो Her, कटम ् FUCA AT WAायो अि sitetन Uae Fire Fire (Agni) (Agni) and and Pavana Pavana (air) (air) predominant predominant substances substances generally generally have have the the property property of of moving moving upwards upwards अधोगा म च भू य ठं ai भू म craven तोयगण serait a aphass ् ११ ु ा धकम ¢¢ Bhumi Bhumi (earth) (earth) and and Toya Toya (water) (water) dominant dominant substances substances generally generally have have the the property property of of moving moving downwards downwards —– 11 11 Veerya Veerya (potency) (potency) ::चरक वाह dat वीय ad तत fad येन या waecde a farया १३ ¢3 ् यते Sat नावीय ged कु ते fafeaceal कि च सवा dkiepat वीयकृता feह ar सा ade Master Master Charaka Charaka says says that that Virya Virya is is that that property, property, through through which which drug drug action action is is made made possible. possible. No No drug drug action action is is possible possible without without Veerya Veerya and and all all actions actions are are possible possible only only by by the the Virya Virya 13. 13. Some Some authors authors opine opine that that there there are are 8 8 types types of of Veerya Veerya (potency (potency of of an an herb/medicinal herb/medicinal substance). substance). Page Page No. No. 130 130 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan वीय न ग ु Rael ि न धं ea हमं म at पqadercih AGदृ ु ु वद ये के ae लघ oy ु ो ण evr ती णं च टधा wateor aT तदे addवं मतम AAASeUT Guru Guru (Heaviness) (Heaviness) and and Laghu Laghu (light (light to to digest) digest) Snigdha Snigdha (unctuous, (unctuous, oily) oily) and and Rooksha Rooksha (dryness) (dryness) Hima Hima (cold) (cold) and and Ushna Ushna (hot) (hot) Mrdu Mrdu (soft) (soft) and and Teekshna Teekshna (piercing, (piercing, strong) strong) 12. 12. गव वीया या dat तेन अ वथ त qa व यते Tatesta Headia ु ा द येव datea सम FUER गण यु कष faatcty वव तषु SAT wagers ु सारे षु श यवहाराय AAA मु य वाeae व TASMAN हणादा प AGEN Those Those who who designated designated Guru Guru (Heaviness) (Heaviness) etc. etc. eight eight qualities qualities as as Veerya, Veerya, do do so so by by direct direct implication. implication. Out Out of of 20 20 qualities, qualities, these these 88 qualities qualities are are predominantly predominantly seen seen in in any any substance, substance, these these 88 qualities qualities are are stronger stronger than than the the rest rest qualities, qualities, are are important important in in day day -- to to -- day day routine, routine, applicable applicable to to majority majority of of substances substances being being considered considered first first in in scientific scientific procedures. procedures. Hence, Hence, these these 88 have have been been given given importance. importance. 14-15. 14-15. Why Why Rasa Rasa and and Others Others are are not not called called as as Viryas? Viryas? अत च fawttacaed वपर त वात ् Baraca संभव या प ad नैव aसा Heed वव यते taredy, रसा ro? येषु, at वीय qateat गव यतः faaeaed ु ादयो ea: -- because because these these are are opposite opposite to to the the 4 4 reasons reasons mentioned mentioned above, above, hence hence gurvadi gurvadi 8 8 qualities qualities are are the the viryas. viryas. Dividha Dividha Viryas Viryas उ वधैवा ये deraraerd वीयमाच ते अ svorणं शीतं eft afatare’d aTप aच नाना मकम प Feyयं steel अ नीषोमौ महाबलौ Macha HAt Aeraeit य ता य तं Trea जग दव aca ना त ाम त safer जातु चत ् carer Some Some other other authors authors consider consider Ushna Ushna (hot) (hot) and and Sheeta Sheeta (cold) (cold) —– only only these these 2 2 qualities qualities as as Veerya Veerya (potency). (potency). Because, Because, though though substances substances are are of of many many kinds kinds and and qualities, qualities, only only fire fire and and water water (Agni (Agni and and Soma) Soma) are are the the powerful powerful ones. ones. 17-18. 17-18. Page Page No. No. 131 131 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Action Action of of Hot Hot Potency Potency (Ushna (Ushna Veerya) Veerya) -- AareoT त ो णं HAम Fe तट ला न aa वेदale दाह SreyorfeaT: आशुपा कताः ृ FoMfel शमं वातकफयोः wife, करो त, aa च UT aden: Hot Hot potency potency causes causes Bhrama Bhrama – — Delusion, Delusion, Dizziness Dizziness Trut Trut —– excessive excessive thirst thirst Glani Glani —– exhaustion, exhaustion, Sveda perspiration, Sveda – — perspiration, Daha Daha – — burning burning sensation, sensation, Ashupakita Ashupakita —– quick quick cooking cooking (transformation) (transformation) and and mitigation mitigation of of Vata Vata and and Kapha; Kapha; Action Action of of cold cold potency potency (Sheeta (Sheeta Veerya) Veerya) —– fer Yat:ुनः श शरं प लादनं जीवनं त भं Tae सादं रLeal: त प तयोः Taeet saet TAF Sheeta Sheeta Virya Virya causes causes Hladana Hladana satiation, satiation, happiness, happiness, Jivana livings, activities Jivana —–livings, activities of of life, life, enlivening enlivening Sthambha Sthambha – — stoppage, stoppage, withholding, withholding, restraining restraining and and Rakta Rakta Pitta Pitta Prasada Prasada – — purification purification of of blood blood and and calming calming of of Pitta. Pitta. 18-19. 18-19. Vipaka taste after Vipaka —–taste after digestion:digestion:जाठरे णाि नना AeAgela योगा यदद रसा तरम ् MOUs ु े त CaeaA रसानां प रणामा ते aस faut वपाक sft इ त Fc: मत 20 Tae TRoated ृ ः 20 The The change change in in the the tastes tastes that that aa substance substance undergoes undergoes at at the the end end of of digestion digestion by by the the association association of of Jatharagni juice in Jatharagni (fire (fire in in the the stomach stomach —– digestion digestion power, power, digestive digestive juice in stomach), stomach), is is called called as as Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion). digestion). 20. 20. Types Types of of Vipaka Vipaka वादःु TET पटु च ARN, मधुरं, अ प यते रसः FAG Foलो अमलं HAA Tea TH: त तोषणकषायाणां faate: वपाकः WaT: ायशः कट faratscrpsraron ae: ु ः 21 21 There There are are three three types types of of Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion). digestion). Swadu Swadu (sweet) (sweet) and and Patu Patu (salt) (salt) tastes tastes undergo undergo Madhura Madhura Vipaka Vipaka (sweet). (sweet). Sour Sour remains remains as as sour sour itself itself –— Amla Amla – — Amla Amla Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion) digestion) Tikta Tikta (bitter), (bitter), Ushna Ushna (pungent) (pungent) and and Kasaya Kasaya (astringent) (astringent) tastes tastes will will generally generally be be Katu Katu Vipaka Vipaka (pungent). (pungent). 21. 21. Page Page No. No. 132 132 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan So, So, generally, generally, sweet sweet and and Salt Salt tastes tastes get get converted converted into into sweet sweet taste taste Sour Sour remains remains as as sour sour and and Bitter, Bitter, pungent pungent and and astringent astringent convert convert into into pungent. pungent. रसे रसौ TeTHACAT त ु यफल त THe FEAयं शIMGT ुभाशुभम ् The The effects effects of of the the tastes, tastes, which which are are felt felt in in the the mouth mouth and and of of the the Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion) digestion) are are similar. similar. That That means means the the effect effect of of sweet sweet taste taste and and sweet sweet Vipaka Vipaka are are similar. similar. 21½. 21’. Mechanism Mechanism of of action action of of substances substances —– Karma Karma Vidhana Vidhana —– कि चत ् Wat रसेन ped कु ते HA कम पाक चापरम22 feirad Weeे न TI ् 22 गण ा तरे ण ator वीयण waravta भावेणैव feet क चन ु eno Substances Substances act act by by the the action action of of taste taste or or by by Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion) digestion) or or by by the the qualities qualities that that they they posses posses (Guna (Guna (qualities)) (qualities)) or or by by Veerya Veerya (potency) (potency) or or by by special special effects. effects. 22 22 य ् ये Uaeयत seat रसाद नां Setdecdet बलव वेन ade वतते 23 Taldlet 23 अ भभूय इतरां तत ् कारण वं प यते Which Which ever ever the the one one that that is is powerful powerful among among them them (Rasa, (Rasa, Guna, Guna, Vipaka, Vipaka, Virya Virya and and Prabhava) Prabhava) it it suppresses suppresses all all the the other other qualities qualities to to exhibit exhibit special special influence influence and and action. action. व ग संयोगे भ fave aorण sqaared sfrad ु dart ुयसा प feह जीयते In In case case of of combination combination of of two two opposite opposite qualities, qualities, the the strong strong one one vanquishes vanquishes the the weak. weak. 23½ 23/4 —– 24. 24. रसं वपाक तौ वीय भाव ता यपोह त ta faced art veracareaciefa बलसा ना म त नै स गकं बलम soresये रसाद Tardrenfara tafser sora ् When When two two opposing opposing qualities qualities are are present present in in equal equal strength, strength, in in that that situation, situation, Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion) digestion) wins wins over over Rasa Rasa (taste); (taste); Veerya Veerya (potency) (potency) wins wins over over (Rasa (Rasa (taste) (taste) and and Vipaka Vipaka and and Prabhava Prabhava (special (special effect) effect) wins wins over over all all of of them them (Rasa, (Rasa, Vipaka Vipaka and and Veerya) Veerya) This This is is the the pattern pattern of of natural natural strength. strength. 25. 25. Prabhava special effect:Prabhava – — special effect:रसा दसा ये यत व श टं तत भावजम ् THe Ta ् कम HA TafAse aa ् warasway Special Special action action exhibited exhibited by by aa substance substance over-ruling over-ruling Rasa Rasa (taste), (taste), Guna Guna (qualities), (qualities), Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion) digestion) and and Veerya Veerya (potency) (potency) is is Prabhava. Prabhava. Page Page No. No. 133 133 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Though Though Rasa, Rasa, Guna, Guna, Vipaka, Vipaka, and and Veerya Veerya in in aa drug drug may may be be similar, similar, sometimes sometimes the the herb herb may may exhibit exhibit entirely entirely different different action action opposite opposite to to these these qualities. qualities. That That special special effect effect of of the the drug drug overoverruling ruling inherent inherent qualities qualities is is called called as as Prabhava. Prabhava. Example Example – — द ती रसा यै तु या प Farnese च क य fatacit वरे चनी doch Tarededeany मधुक य च म ृ वीका,yd घत ीर य daa द पनम ् Ayary a Fadia, ृ ं ates Danti Danti and and Chitraka Chitraka – — Though Though Danti Danti – — Baliospermum Baliospermum montanum montanum is is identical identical with with Chitraka Chitraka (plumbago (plumbago zeylanica) zeylanica) in in respect respect of of Rasa Rasa (taste) (taste) etc, etc, Danti Danti is is aa purgative purgative while while Chitraka Chitraka is is not. not. Hence, Hence, purgation purgation is is the the Prabhava Prabhava of of Danti. Danti. Similarly Similarly so, so, are are Madhuka Madhuka – — Licorice Licorice —– Glycyrrhiza Glycyrrhiza glabra) glabra) and and Mrdvika Mrdvika (grapes) (grapes) Madhuka Madhuka and and dry dry grapes grapes – — both both have have similar similar qualities. qualities. But But dry dry grape grape has has mild mild purgative purgative action, action, but but Madhuka Madhuka does does not. not. Milk Milk and and ghee ghee —– both both possess possess similar similar qualities. qualities. But But ghee ghee increases increases digestion digestion strength strength but but milk milk does does not. not. Hence Hence increasing increasing digestion digestion strength strength is is the the special special effect effect of of ghee. ghee. 26. 26. Vichitra Vichitra Pratyayardha Pratyayardha Dravya Dravya —– extraordinary extraordinary substances:substances:इ सामा यतः HA कम FeUdlet, याद नां, YaRT पन तत ् faत Waa: ु च Act fafda वच wesansy a: ययार ध AYA गोधूमो adit वातिजत ् ape वातकृत ् यवः उ णा Aca: म याः पयः कटुः FAVr संहो aTन श SOOT Ta: शीतं ett HE: ewe: ूकरः A A special special category, category, known known as as Vichitra Vichitra Pratyarabda Pratyarabda exists. exists. It It means means – — born born out out of of peculiar peculiar combination combination of of peculiar peculiar factors. factors. For For example: example: both both wheat wheat and and barley barley possess possess sweat sweat and and heaviness heaviness qualities qualities yet yet wheat wheat mitigates mitigates Vata Vata but but barley barley aggravates aggravates it. it. Fish Fish and and milk milk are are sweet sweet and and heavy heavy but but still still milk milk is is cool cool and and fish fish is is hot. hot. Meat Meat of of lion lion and and meat meat of of pig pig both both are are sweet sweet in in taste taste but but still still lion lion meat meat has has Katu Katu Vipaka Vipaka (pungent (pungent taste taste conversion conversion after after digestion) digestion) and and pig pig meat meat has has sweet sweet Vipaka Vipaka (taste (taste conversion conversion after after digestion). digestion). Thus Thus ends ends Dravyadi Dravyadi Vijnaniya Vijnaniya chapter chapter of of Astanga Astanga Hrudaya Hrudaya Sutrastana. Sutrastana. Page Page No. No. 134 134 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter द यं Tastes, Chapter 10 10 Rasabhediyam Rasabhediyam रसभे Tanda Tastes, Their Their Qualities Qualities and and Effects Effects th The The 10 10" chapter chapter of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hrudaya Hrudaya Sutrasthana Sutrasthana is is called called as as Rasabhediya Rasabhediya adhyaya. adhyaya. Rasa Rasa means means taste taste and and bheda bheda means means types. types. This This chapter chapter discusses discusses in in detail detail regarding regarding the the types types of of tastes tastes and and their their properties. properties. Tastes Tastes – — Types Types and and introduction introduction Origin Origin of of taste taste – — Rasa Rasa utpatti utpatti – — SAS itedन SAT GT AY मा भो अि मा HAA: अ बुतेजः ख वायु Heeaferoraiferct: अ य नलगो नलैः वयो बणैः ward मात aye: मधुरा द Tatas: रसो वः¢१ qaateant: ् भूतःै Hens The The tastes tastes are are formed formed due due to to the the combination combination of of two two Bhutas Bhutas (primary (primary elements). elements). Madhura –— Prithvi Madhura (sweet) (sweet) Prithvi + + Ap Ap (earth (earth + + water) water) Amla –— Tejas Amila (sour) (sour) Tejas + + Ap Ap (fire (fire + + water) water) Lavana –— Ap Lavana (salt) (salt) Ap ++ Tejas Tejas (water (water + + fire) fire) Tikta –— Akasa Tikta (bitter) (bitter) Akasa + + Vayu Vayu (ether (ether + + air) air) Katu –— Tejas Katu (pungent) (pungent) Tejas + + Vayu Vayu (Fire (Fire and and air) air) Kashaya –— Prithvi -- 1. Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) Prithvi++ Vayu Vayu (earth (earth ++ air) air) 1. Characteristics Characteristics of of tastes tastes -- Rasa Rasa Lakshana Lakshana —– Swadu// Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) ते व या सं aMषां faqaicaet वादं ु यो व alg at ara मनioraia ुल पत आ वा यमानो AEA दे ह य Teleall लादनो अ सादनः HATA HaTTATaat: पपी लकाद नम ् fre:यः Trier Swadu Swadu// Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) is is understood understood by by its its sticking sticking in in the the oral oral cavity, cavity, providing providing aa feeling feeling of of contentment contentment and and pleasure pleasure to to the the body body and and comfort comfort to to the the sense sense organs. organs. It It is is liked liked even even by by ants ants 2. 2. Amla Amla (sour) (sour) अ लः ालयते म HEAT ATA ुखम ् हषणो तानां अ Biot रोमद daarciet sifeszatercntac: ुव नकोचनः Amla Amla (sour) (sour) makes makes the the mouth mouth watery, watery, causes causes horripilation, horripilation, tingling tingling of of the the teeth teeth and and leads leads to to closing closing of of the the eyes eyes and and brows. brows. 3. 3. Page Page No. No. 135 135 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Lavana Lavana (salt) (salt) लवणः TACUARA य दय या यं कपोलगलदाहक AAT: HUTS HAृ त ् Lavana Lavana (salt) (salt) causes causes more more moisture moisture in in the the mouth mouth (increase (increase salivation) salivation) and and burning burning sensation sensation in in the the cheeks cheeks and and throat. throat. 3½. 3’. Tikta Tikta (bitter) (bitter) त तो faeredcaned वशदय या यं रसनं तहि त च fatal tae wfaeied 7 Tikta Tikta (bitter) (bitter) cleanses cleanses the the mouth mouth and and destroys destroys the the organs organs of of taste taste (makes (makes perception perception of of other other tastes tastes impossible). impossible). 4. 4. Katu Katu (pungent) (pungent) उ वे जय त िज वा ं कुवाि च म चमां कटुः ावय त sata अ नासा aaaia यं Hutcit कपोलौ agdta दहतीव च a Katu Katu (pungent) (pungent) stimulates stimulates the the tip tip of of the the tongue, tongue, causes causes irritation, irritation, brings brings out out secretions secretions from from the the eyes, eyes, nose nose and and mouth mouth and and causes causes burning burning sensation sensation of of the the cheeks. cheeks. 55 Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) कषायो जडये त ् िज वां क ठ ोतो वब धकृत ् Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) inactivates inactivates the the tongue tongue (diminishes (diminishes capacity capacity of of taste taste perception) perception) and and causes causes obstructions obstructions ofof the the passage passage in in the the throat. throat. 5½. 5’. Action Action of of tastes tastes -- Rasa Rasa Karma Karma Sweet Sweet taste taste – - Madhura Madhura Rasa Rasa (taste) (taste) मधुरो रसः आज मसा यात ् कु ते धातन ू ां बलं बलम ् बालव ृ attत after ीण aut वण her केश sfegy इि य sista ओजसाम ् aTetgg WEA WS:ु ः श तो FET: बं ह क यः EdeY त य Hella संधानकृत ग ृ णः HUST: आयु योstat: जीवनः िPeete: न धः Acenfeter प ता नल fasrag: वषापहः 3TysAr Sweet Sweet taste taste being being accustomed accustomed since since birth, birth, produces produces greater greater strength strength in in the the body body tissues. tissues. It It is is very very good good for for children, children, the the aged, aged, the the wounded, wounded, the the emaciated, emaciated, improves improves skin skin complexion, complexion, hairs, hairs, strength strength of of sense sense organs organs and and Ojas Ojas (essence (essence of of the the tissues, tissues, immunity). immunity). Sweet Sweet taste taste causes causes stoutness stoutness of of the the body, body, good good for for the the throat, throat, increases increases breast breast milk, milk, unites unites fractured fractured bones. bones. Page Page No. No. 136 136 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Sweet Sweet taste taste is is not not easily easily digestible, digestible, prolongs prolongs life, life, helps helps life life activities; activities; It It is is unctuous, unctuous, mitigates mitigates Pitta, Pitta, Vata Vata and and Visha Visha (poison). (poison). By By excess excess use use it it produces produces diseases diseases arising arising from from fat fat and and Kapha, Kapha, obesity, obesity, Asthma, Asthma, unconsciousness, unconsciousness, diabetes, diabetes, enlargements enlargements of of glands glands of of the the neck, neck, malignant malignant tumour tumour (cancer) (cancer) and and such such others. others. 7-9 7-9 Sour Sour and and Salt Salt tastes tastes —– अ लोअि नद ape तकृत ् िPetse न धो EEA: यः Weel पाचनरोचनः HAA eet: उ ण att वीय fea हम Ea: पशः Gort: ीणनः Felaat लेदनो ae: लघुः soot RMAत HB AAA: करो कफ प cCAM ता ंमSA ूढवातान ुलोमनः Amla Amla (sour) (sour) stimulates stimulates the the Agni Agni —– (digestive (digestive activity), activity), is is unctuous, unctuous, good good for for the the heart, heart, digestive, digestive, appetizer, appetizer, hot hot in in potency, potency, cold cold on on touch touch (coolant (coolant on on external external applications, applications, relieves relieves burning burning sensation), sensation), Sour Sour taste taste satiates, satiates, causes causes moistening, moistening, it it is is easy easy for for digestion, digestion, causes causes aggravation aggravation of of Kapha, Kapha, Pitta Pitta and and Asra Asra (blood) (blood) and and makes makes the the inactive inactive Vata Vata move move downwards. downwards. सो य य त तनोः क त मरं a अ seeaededat: Pater ु या शै थ यं fat augडु Wegdd em क पा डुतव feat वसप शोफ मम ् aay faewte Jeटृ sated व फोट त वरान ् Sour the body, Sour taste taste if if used used in in excess, excess, causes causes looseness looseness ofofthe body, loss loss of of strength, strength, blindness, blindness, giddiness, giddiness, itching itching (irritation), (irritation), pallor pallor (whitish (whitish yellow yellow discoloration discoloration as as in in anaemia), anaemia), Visarpa Visarpa —– Herpes, Herpes, spreading spreading skin skin disease, disease, swellings, swellings, Visphota Visphota (small (small pox), pox), thirst thirst and and fevers. fevers. 10 10 – — 11½. 11%. Salt Salt taste taste – — Lavana Lavana rasa rasa :: लवणः तंभ सं घात ब ध व मापनो अि नकृत ् नेहनः Tdeat: वेदनः ती रोचन छे दभेदकृत ् Tret: Havणो taawedaviand सो अ तयु तो sravaed अ पवनं wierd ख लतं oferd प लतं afery व लम ् a afagedt तट ृ कु ठ वष वसपान ् जनये पये बलम ् Lavana Lavana (salt) (salt) relieves relieves rigidity, rigidity, clears clears the the obstructions obstructions of of the the channels channels and and pores, pores, increases increases digestive digestive activity, activity, lubricates, lubricates, causes causes sweating, sweating, penetrates penetrates deep deep into into the the tissues, tissues, improves improves taste, taste, new new growth, growth, abscess abscess etc.). etc.). Used Used in in excess, excess, it it causes causes vitiation vitiation of of Asra Asra (blood) (blood) and and Vata, Vata, causes causes baldness, baldness, graying graying of of hair, hair, wrinkles of the wrinkles of the skin, skin, thirst, thirst, skin skin diseases, diseases, effect effect of of poison, poison, Visarpa Visarpa – — Herpes, Herpes, spreading spreading skin skin disease of the disease and and decrease decrease of of strength strength of the body. body. 12 12 —– 13. 13. Bitter, Bitter, Pungent Pungent and and Astringent Astringent tastes tastes -त तः Fae वयं अरो च णःु अ वषम ् fad: anifacoy: sreftचं क Hf geटृ fav ृ म त क वरो लेशदाह Wed प त कफान HS HSI HHT ् जये ATत ् ु ठ म ूछा sMicHoAele Fle GH मAsalजा शshee लेद Acl मेदो वसा ु मAraVirsor: ू ोपशोषणः Page Page No. No. 137 137 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan ogaeat लघ हमो wat: ः CaegHavotaeiec: त यकक ठ वशोधनः ुम यो feat धात नल याधीन ् अ तयोगा करो त सः Urdars Hferroareiter sticsatancaeiter a: ु य अ Bitter Bitter taste: taste: Tikta Tikta by by itself itself is is not not tasty, tasty, but but it it cures cures anorexia, anorexia, worms, worms, thirst, thirst, poison, poison, skin skin diseases, diseases, loss loss of of consciousness, consciousness, fever, fever, nausea, nausea, burning burning sensations; sensations; Bitter Bitter mitigates mitigates Pitta Pitta and and Kapha, Kapha, dries dries up up moisture, moisture, fat, fat, muscle-fat muscle-fat marrow, marrow, faeces faeces and and urine; urine; Tikta Tikta Rasa Rasa is is easily easily digestible, digestible, increases increases intelligence, intelligence, cold cold in in potency, potency, dry dry (causes (causes dryness), dryness), cleanses cleanses breast breast milk, milk, and and throat. throat. Used Used in in excess, excess, it it causes causes depletion depletion of of Dhatus Dhatus (tissues) (tissues) and and diseases diseases of of Vata Vata origin. origin. 14 14 —– 16. 16. Actions Actions of of pungent pungent taste taste – —- Katu Katu Rasa Rasa Karma Karma – — कट HE:ु ः गलामय NAAY उदद Faq क PSु ठ अलसक HoH शोफिजत eiHfst ् नेहमेदः Feraaergor: ले दोपशोषणः ATण अवसादनः Haaeat: Tiga: द पनः पाचनो चयः शोधनो न य शोषणः Alot: Ueell VIA: Me अ Zeores VITITT: छ ना त ब धान ् Maia ोतां स aquifer ववण fens Ieee ware: ृ ो त कफापहः क तयोगेन त Hed GB अ saistarte FM spacers ु ते सो ु बल यम ् ृ णां श Feel sgeua aed afeqeorey caer मू छा आकु चनं क पं क टप ृ ठा दषु यथाम ् Pungent Pungent cures cures diseases diseases of of throat, throat, allergic allergic rashes, rashes, leprosy leprosy and and other other skin skin diseases, diseases, Alasaka Alasaka (a (a kind kind of of indigestion), indigestion), swelling swelling (odema); (odema); reduces reduces the the swelling swelling of of the the ulcers, ulcers, dries dries up up the the unctuousness unctuousness (greasiness), (greasiness), fat, fat, and and moisture moisture (water); (water); Pungent Pungent taste taste increases increases hunger, hunger, it it is is digestive, digestive, improves improves taste, taste, Shodhana Shodhana (cleansing, (cleansing, eliminates eliminates the the Dosas), Dosas), dries dries up up moisture moisture of of the the food, food, breaks breaks up up hard hard masses, masses, dilates dilates (expands) (expands) the the channels channels and and balances balances Kapha. Kapha. By By over over use, use, it it causes causes thirst, thirst, depletion depletion of of Sukra Sukra (reproductive (reproductive element, element, sperm) sperm) and and strength, strength, fainting fainting (loss (loss of of consciousness) consciousness) contractures, contractures, tremors tremors and and pain pain in in the the waist, waist, back back etc. etc. 17 17 – — 19. 19. Actions Actions of of astringent astringent taste taste – — Kashaya Kashaya Rasa Rasa Karma Karma – — HU: Wectetel Teta कषायः प तकफहा ग ु र पीडनो Hse रोपणः Wo: शीतः efit: HAASAN आमसं त भनो faeneret: वशोधनः लेद Aalfagirscr: मेदो वशोषणः Fela Msा ह Basti ोअ त calewaleet: व सादनः Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) balances balances Pitta Pitta and and Kapha, Kapha, itit is is not not easily easily digestible; digestible; cleanses cleanses the the blood, blood, causes causes squeezing squeezing and and healing healing of of ulcers ulcers (wounds), (wounds), has has cold cold potency, potency, dries dries up up the the moisture moisture and and fat, fat, hinders hinders the the digestion digestion of of undigested undigested food. food. Astringent Astringent taste taste is is water water absorbent, absorbent, thereby thereby causing causing constipation, constipation, drynessand drynessand cleanses cleanses the the skin skin too too much. much. Page Page No. No. 138 138 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan aliaत शी efifert: ae अ Hitत fascartaret करो लतः स व टंभा मान त qeटृ Baar: ु ः ु ज Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan का य पौ ोतोरोध मल हान ् aed chesष serंश wane Acraere] Used Used in in excess, excess, it it causes causes stasis stasis of of food food without without digestion, digestion, flatulence, flatulence, pain pain in in the the heart heart region, region, thirst, thirst, emaciation, emaciation, loss loss of of virility, virility, obstruction obstruction of of the the channels channels and and constipation. constipation. 20 20 —– 21½. 21%. Madhura group of Madhura Gana Gana —–group of sweet sweet substances: substances: Ud HA ् घत गड ु ा ोडमोचचोचप षकम ृ हेAम T[salsArTaIIS अभी वीरा GA पनस Wotlee राजादनबला यम ् ARAN soars, मे चत ः Wieser प ण योजीव ती slaw जीवक aseit ऋषभौ ACदे Tae: मधूकं ay मधुकंfare ब बी faant वदार arava ावणीयुगम ् Aye तग ी र यौ areakt का मर ae सहे ु ा ीर aftitvat ai ीर शoroु ला qa ीरे ुगो ुर ौ ा ा दमधुरो seT: गणः atrapiaedtcaremeaeRy Ghrita Ghrita (ghee, (ghee, butter butter fat), fat), Hema Hema (gold), (gold), Guda Guda (molasses), (molasses), Akshoda, Akshoda, Mocha, Mocha, Chocha, Chocha, Parushaka, Parushaka, Abhiru, Abhiru, Vira, Vira, Panasa, Panasa, Rajadana, Rajadana, the the three three Bala Bala (Bala, (Bala, Atibala Atibala and and Nagabala), Nagabala), The The two two Medas Medas – — Meda Meda and and Mahameda, Mahameda, The The four four Parni Parni – — Shalaparni, Shalaparni, Prishnaparni, Prishnaparni, Mudgaparni, Mudgaparni, Mashaparni, Mashaparni, Jivanti Jivanti – — Leptadenia Leptadenia reticulata, reticulata, Jivaka Jivaka – — Malaxis Malaxis acuminata acuminata D.Don/ / Microstylis Microstylis wallichii wallichii Lindl. Lindl. , Rishabhaka, Rishabhaka, Madhuka Madhuka – — Licorice Licorice – — Glycyrrhiza Glycyrrhiza glabra, glabra, Madhuka Madhuka – — Madhuka Madhuka longifolia, longifolia, Bimbi Coccinia grandis Bimbi— –Coccinia grandis // indica, indica, Vidari Vidari – — Pueraria Pueraria tuberosa, tuberosa, the the two two Sravani Sravani—– Mundi Mundi and and Sravani, Sravani, Ksheerasukla, Ksheerasukla, Tugaksiri, Tugaksiri, the the two two Ksheerini, Ksheerini, Gambhari, Gambhari, the the two two Saha, Saha, milk, milk, sugarcane, sugarcane, Gokshura, Gokshura, Ksaudra, Ksaudra, Draksa Draksa etc. etc. form form the the group group of of sweet sweet substances. substances. 22 22 – — 24. 24. Amla Amla Gana Gana —– group group of of sour sour substances: substances: अ लो धा ीफला ल कामातल ु ु गा लवेतसम ् दा डमं रजतं चु ं Weta पालेवतं afer दध asa tai तasheं Uh आ मा ातकं भ यं क प थं करमदकम ् Dhatriphala Dhatriphala —– Amla, Amla, Amlika Amlika —– tamarind, tamarind, Matulunga, Matulunga, Page Page No. No. 139 139 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Amlavetasa Amlavetasa —– Garcinia Garcinia pedunculata pedunculata Roxb. Roxb. // Rheum Rheum emodi emodi Wall., Wall., Dadima Dadima —– Pomegranate Pomegranate —– Punica Punica granatum, granatum, Rajata Rajata (Siver), (Siver), Buttermilk, Buttermilk, Chukra, Chukra, Palevata, Palevata, Dadhi Dadhi – — Curds, Curds, Mango, Mango, Amrataka, Amrataka, Bhavya Bhavya —– Dillenia Dillenia indica, indica, Kapittha Kapittha —– Feronia Feronia limonia limonia // Limonia Limonia acidissima, acidissima, Karamardaka Karamardaka etc. etc. form form the the sour sour group. group. 25 25 —– 26. 26. Lavana Lavana Gana Gana – — group group of of salts:salts:वरं सौवचलं कृ णं बडं सामु मौ दम ् रोमकं Ueet पांसुजं शीसं ार च लवणो गणः Wah eres aed qavit aT: Varam Varam (Saindhava (Saindhava – — Rock Rock Salt), Salt), Sauvarcala Sauvarcala (sochal (sochal salt), salt), Krishna Krishna (black (black salt) salt) Bida Bida salt, salt, Samudra Samudra (table (table salt), salt), Audbhida, Audbhida, Romaka, Romaka, Pamshuja, Pamshuja, Seesa Seesa (lead) (lead) and and Kshara Kshara (Alkalies) (Alkalies) form form the the salt salt group. group. 27. 27. Tikta Tikta Gana Gana —– group group of of bitters bitters ::त तः Yale पदोल ardedt ाय ती arene वालकोशीर deaery च दनम ् faa: भ कटुका TINT तगरा WedcIhay गु व सकम ् earaarsl ू न ब न ब HEH न तमाला aletatet वरजनी Ata मु त Adlewrna मूवाट पकम atta पाठापामागकां ड OSTA THEAयायोग aT SPP ु ू चध वयासकम ् oN . प चमल महा या यौ feet वशाल sifcfasraar अ त वषावचा wae ू ं Aerecareat Patoli, Patoli, Trayanti Trayanti – — Gentiana Gentiana kurroa, kurroa, Valaka, Valaka, Usira Usira —– Vetiveria Vetiveria zizanioides, zizanioides, Chandana Chandana —– Sandalwood, Sandalwood, Bhunimba Bhunimba – — The The creat creat (whole (whole plant) plant) —– Andrographis Andrographis paniculata, paniculata, Nimba Nimba —– Neem Neem – — Azadirachta Azadirachta indica, indica, Katuka Katuka —– Picrorhiza Picrorhiza kurroa, kurroa, Tagara Tagara —– Indian Indian Valerian Valerian (root) (root) —– Valeriana Valeriana wallichi, wallichi, Aguru, Aguru, Vatsaka Vatsaka – — Holarrhena Holarrhena antidysentirica, antidysentirica, Naktamala, Naktamala, Turmeric Turmeric and and tree tree turmeric, turmeric, Musta Musta —– Nut Nut grass grass (root) (root) —– Cyperus Cyperus rotundus, rotundus, Murva, Murva, Atarushaka Atarushaka – — Adhatoda Adhatoda vasica, vasica, Patha Patha – — Cyclea Cyclea peltata, peltata, Apamarga Apamarga -- Prickly Prickly Chaff Chaff Flower Flower – — Achyranthes Achyranthes aspera, aspera, Kamsya Kamsya (bronze), (bronze), Ayas Ayas (iron), (iron), Guduchi Guduchi – — Tinospora Tinospora cordifolia cordifolia Page Page No. No. 140 140 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Dhanvayasaka, Dhanvayasaka, Mahat Mahat Pancamula Pancamula – — Bilva, Bilva, Agnimantha, Agnimantha, Shyonaka, Shyonaka, Gambhari, Gambhari, Patala Patala the the two two Vyaghri Vyaghri – — Brihati Brihati and and Kantakari, Kantakari, Visala, Visala, Ativisha, Ativisha, Vacha Vacha etc. etc. form form the the group group of of bitters. bitters. 28 28 – — 29½. 29'/. Katu Katu Gana Gana —– group group of of pungents:pungents:कटुको ह गु म रचकृ मिजत प चकोलकम ् कुठे रा या ERcat: ह रतकाः प मू म करम ् pores edतं AaHScHTA HinguHingu- Asa Asa foetida foetida Maricha Maricha —– Black Black pepper, pepper, Krimijit Krimyit – — Vidanga, Vidanga, Panchakola Panchakola – — Chitraka, Chitraka, Pippalmoola, Pippalmoola, Pippali, Pippali, Chitraka Chitraka and and ginger, ginger, leafy leafy vegetables vegetables such such as as Kutheraka Kutheraka and and others others (mentioned (mentioned in in verse verse 103 103 of of chapter chapter 6 6 earlier), earlier), Pitta Pitta (bile (bile of of animals), animals), Mutra Mutra (urines), (urines), Arushkara Arushkara etc. etc. form form the the pungent pungent group. group. 30 30 -30½. -30/4. Kashaya Kashaya Varga Varga (Gana) (Gana) – — group group of of astringents: astringents: वगःकषायः या ं ets: शर षः wet ख दरो AY मधु atau: पwaet कद बोद ु बरं AFA मु ता वाला जनगै HL रकम ् HMR AS aA बालं HAY क प थं Get खजूरं fearsterene वसप ो पला द च Te 7 Group Group of of astringents astringents consists consists of of Pathya Pathya – — Chebuic Chebuic Myrobalan Myrobalan (fruit (fruit rind) rind) – — Terminalia Terminalia chebula, chebula, Aksha Aksha —– Terminalia Terminalia bellirica, bellirica, Shireesa, Shireesa, Khadira Khadira —– Black Black catechu catechu (heart (heart wood wood extract) extract) —– Acacia Acacia catechu, catechu, Madhu Madhu (honey), (honey), Kadamba, Kadamba, Udumbara, Udumbara, Mukta Mukta (Pearls), (Pearls), Pravala Pravala (Coral), (Coral), Anjana Anjana – — Aqueous Aqueous extract extract of of Berberis Berberis aristata aristata (antimony), (antimony), Gairika Gairika —– Purified Purified Red Red Ochre, Ochre, Bala Bala kapittha, kapittha, Kharjura Kharjura —– dates, dates, Bisa Bisa —– lotus lotus stalk, stalk, Padma Padma —– Nelumbium Nelumbium speciosum, speciosum, Utpala Utpala – — Nymphaea Nymphaea stellata stellata etc ete 31½ 312 – — 32. 32. Page Page No. No. 141 141 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan General General properties properties of of tastes tastes and and exceptions:exceptions:Madhura Madhura AR ुरं wes shviteanfersarect मध ले मलं Wal ायो जीणा छा लयवाहते म गोधम ौ ात ् Mara सताया जा गला मषात ् Fed sss ु गात ् wey: ू तः ater Generally, Generally, substances substances of of sweet sweet taste taste increase increase Kapha Kapha except except old old Shali Shali (more (more than than one one year year old old rice) rice) and and Yava Yava – — Barley Barley – — Hordeum Hordeum vulgare, vulgare, Mudga Mudga (green (green gram), gram), Godhuma Godhuma (wheat), (wheat), Kshaudra Kshaudra (honey), (honey), Sita Sita (sugar) (sugar) and and meat meat of of animals animals of of desert desert – — like like lands. lands. Amla Amla ायो अ प तजननं afsaractaied दा डमामलकाहते Oreat sotलं Cedoteted Generally Generally substances substances of of sour sour taste taste aggravate aggravate Pitta, Pitta, except except Dadima Dadima —– Pomegranate Pomegranate – — Punica Punica granatum granatum and and Amalaka Amalaka (Indian (Indian gooseberry). gooseberry). Lavana Lavana अप HUAयं लवणं Sao ायः च ुषःअ य Tera सै धवात ् Wa: wa:Heas Generally Generally salts salts are are bad bad for for the the eyes eyes (vision) (vision) except except Saindhava Saindhava – — Rock Rock Salt. Salt. Tikta Tikta and and Katu Katu त तं कट fata ag ु च a भ ass Hqु यं वातकोपनम aaa ् ू य ठं अ ऋते Re अम HyAMTelHsea yosrpoor Tatra: ु ठ कृ णा रसोनतः ृतापटोल यां श Generally Generally bitters bitters and and pungents pungents are are non-aphrodisiacs non-aphrodisiacs and and aggravate aggravate (increase) (increase) Vata Vata except except for for Amrita Amrita (Indian (Indian tinospora), tinospora), Patoli, Patoli, Shunthi Shunthi (ginger), (ginger), Krishna Krishna (long (long pepper) pepper) and and Rasona Rasona – — Garlic Garlic – — Alium Alium sativum. sativum. Kashaya Kashaya कषायं HTS ायशः Weer: शीतंat त भनं चा वना Cara TATयां fer Astringents Astringents are are usually usually cold cold (in (in potency) potency) and and obstructive obstructive —– except except Abhaya Abhaya —– Chebulic Chebulic Myrobalan Myrobalan (fruit (fruit rind) rind) – — Terminalia Terminalia chebula. chebula. 33 33 —– 35½. 35/4. Page Page No. No. 142 142 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Tastes Tastes and and potency potency Hot Hot Potency Potency रसाः क व ललवणा faeforrsory वयणो णा Belted यथो तरम ् Ta: HeaFaeraor Katu Katu (pungent), (pungent), Amla Amla (sour), (sour), Lavana Lavana (salt) (salt) are are of of hot hot potency potency (Ushna (Ushna Veerya Veerya (potency), (potency), each each one, one, more more so so in in their their succeeding succeeding order; order; Cold Cold Potency Potency त तः कषायो fata: HUA मध Ayededed etcton: ुर त वदे व aच शीतलाः Similarly Similarly Tikta Tikta (bitter), (bitter), Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) and and Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) are are cold cold in in potency, potency, each each one one more more in in their their succeeding succeeding order. order. Ruksha Ruksha त तः कट मला तथा ford: HE:ु ः कषाय HVATच Ka ा बTEACMeAAT Tikta Tikta (bitter), (bitter), Katu Katu (pungent) (pungent) and and Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) are are dry dry and and cause cause constipation constipation (each (each one one more more so so in in their their succeeding succeeding order) order) Snigdha Snigdha पटु अ लमध3 ुराः िerst: न धाः स sFoHe: UscfavH ू मा ताः ृ ट व मNnaaa: Cc ug while while Patu Patu (salt), (salt), Amla Amla (sour), (sour), Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) are are unctuous unctuous and and help help elimination elimination of of faeces, faeces, urine urine and and flatus, flatus, each each one one more more so so in in their their succeeding succeeding order. order. Guru Guru Gel: कशाय HMACACATET ALT:ुरः परमं WA ग Te:ु ः पटोः त मा च मध Patu Patu (salt), (salt), Kashaya Kashaya (astringent) (astringent) and and Madhura Madhura (sweet) (sweet) are are heavy heavy to to digest, digest, each each one one more more so so in in their their succeeding succeeding order order Amla Amla AREA: PECACAT ATATAY लघ माद प aच foarte: त तकः ुर लः कट ु त मात ् त While While Amla Amla (sour), (sour), Katu Katu (pungent) (pungent) and and Tikta Tikta (bitter) (bitter) are are easy easy to to digest, digest, each each one one more more so so in in their their succeeding succeeding orde orde 36 36 – — 38½. 38%. Page Page No. No. 143 143 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Rasa tastes:Rasa Samyoga Samyoga Samkhya Samkhya —– number number of of combination combination ofoftastes:सं योगाः AeasMecHhera स तप चाश क पना FTत ु Pssee4 षि टधा SAT: रसानां गक वेन Tart यौ alacdat यथा थल वभ यते agereyct ू ं Tasca The The combination combination of of tastes tastes will will be be fifty fifty seven, seven, but but their their actual actual counting counting will will be be sixty sixty three, three, on on the the basis basis ofof their their usage usage (in (in daily daily routine routine of of selection selection of of drugs, drugs, planning planning ofof therapies therapies etc.) etc.) एक ै कह ना तान ् TSTaer प चदश Afed याि त TH रस ataवके Ubneletecel वादद पटु Atel ीन ् पट ि त तं vey एककम ् Preeके targeenee: ve ुleard ु शा लः oe चत ु केषु दश वाद ु चतुरो HFA: अ लः पट सकृ त ् TPHY EU TAIN Tg:ु ः AHL uPA प चके वे कमेवा लो A: मधरु ः WT प च Aad सेवते यमेकं VSATIAAAFALT षडा वादामसंयु ता च ISAT: ष साः ead Eliminating Eliminating 11 rasa rasa at at each each combination combination ,, the the number number of of combination combination of of22 rasas rasas each each will will be be 15 15 In In the the combination combination ofof 3 3 rasas rasas each each ,, it it will will be be 10 10 with with svadu, svadu, 6 6 with with amla, amla, 3 3 with with lavana, lavana, 1| with with tikta tikta total total 20 20 In In the the combination combination of of44 rasas rasas it it will will be be 10 10 with with svadu, svadu, 4 4 with with amla, amla, 11 with with lavana lavana total total 15 15 In In the the combination combination of of55 rasas rasas itit will will be be 11 with with amla, amla, 5 5 with with svadu svadu total total 6 6 In In the the combination combination of of all all the the 6 6 rasas rasas it it will will be be one one Each Each rasa rasa individually individually will will be be 6 6 Thus Thus forming forming 63 63 combinations combinations in in total total ष प चका, Ie ष च यु चतु वकौ प चदश कारौ Ve WITH, T WMT: waeerrant ुथ साः KIeddefast मे दाि का faefernAa वंश तरे कमेव gestयं षडा वाद म त yes षि ठ Aaieara vetcaratata Page Page No. No. 144 144 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan TO TO SUM SUM UP UP The The combination combination ofof 5 5 rasas rasas it it is is 6 6 11 of of six six rasa rasa individually individually e It It is is 15 15 of of twos twos e It It is is 15 15 of of fours fours e 20 20 of of threes threes ° 11 of of all all tastes tastes together together e Total Total = = 63 63 DAWPWN DS Each Each taste taste separately separately = = 66 1. Madhura Madhura 2. Amla Amla 3. Lavana Lavana 4. Katu Katu 5. Tikta Tikta 6. Kashaya Kashaya Combination Combination ofof2 2 tastes tastes = = 15 15 PADMA YNSE 1. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla 2. Madhura Madhura + + tikta tikta 3. Madhura Madhura + + lavana lavana 4. Madhura Madhura + + kashaya kashaya 5. Madhura Madhura + + katu katu 6. Amla Amla + + lavana lavana 7. Amla+ Amla+ tikta tikta 8. Amla Amla + + katu katu 9. 9. Amla Amla +kashaya +kashaya 10. 10. Lavana Lavana + + tikta tikta 11. 11. Lavana Lavana + + katu katu 12. 12. Lavana Lavana +kashaya +kashaya 13. 13. Tikta Tikta + + katu katu 14. 14. Tikta+ Tikta+ kashaya kashaya 15. 15. Katu Katu + + kashaya kashaya Combination Combination of of 3 3 tastes tastes =20 =20 1. 1. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + lavana lavana 2. 2. Madhura+ Madhura+ amla amla + + tikta tikta 3. 3. Madhura+ Madhura+ amla amla + + katu katu 4. 4. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + kashaya kashaya 5. 5. Madhura+ Madhura+ lavana lavana + + tikta tikta 6. 6. Madhura Madhura + + lavana lavana + + katu katu 7. 7. Madhura+ Madhura+ lavana lavana + + kashaya kashaya 8. 8. Madhura Madhura + + tikta tikta + + katu katu 9. 9. Madhura+ Madhura+ tikta tikta + + kashaya kashaya 10. 10. Madhura Madhura + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 11. 11. Amla+ Amla+ lavana lavana + + tikta tikta 12. 12. Amla+ Amla+ lavana lavana + + katu katu 13. 13. Amla+ Amlat+ lavana lavana +kashaya +kashaya Page Page No. No. 145 145 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan 14. 14. Amla+ Amla+ tikta tikta + + katu katu 15. 15. Amla+ Amla+ tikta tikta + + kashaya kashaya 16. Amla+ katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 16 . Amla+ 17. Lavana+ tikta tikta + + katu katu 17. Lavana+ 18. Lavana+ tikta tikta + + kashaya kashaya 18. Lavana+ 19. Lavana+ katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 19. Lavana+ 20. Tikta+ katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 20. Tikta+ SPADMNAPYWN Combination Combination ofof4 4 tastes tastes = = 15 15 1. Madhura 1. Madhura + + amla amla + + lavana lavana + + tikta tikta 2. Madhura+ Madhura+ amla amla + + lavana lavana +katu +katu 3. Madhura+ Madhura+ amla amla + + lavana lavana +kashaya +kashaya 4. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + tikta+ tikta+ katu katu 5. Madhura+ Madhura+ amla amla + + tikta+ tikta+ kashaya kashaya 6. Madhura+ Madhura+ amla amla + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 7. Madhura+ Madhura+ lavana lavana + + tikta tikta + + katu katu 8. Madhura+ Madhura+ lavana lavana + + tikta tikta + + kashaya kashaya 9. Madhura+ Madhura+ lavana+ lavana+ katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 10. Madhura Madhura + + tikta tikta + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 11. Amla+ lavana lavana + + tikta+katu tiktatkatu 11. Amla+ 12. Amla+ lavana lavana + + tikta tikta + + kashaya kashaya 12. Amla+ 13. Amla+ lavana lavana + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 13. Amla+ 14 14 Amla+ Amla+ tikta tikta + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 15. Lavana + + tikta tikta + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 15. Lavana Combination Combination of of 55 tastes tastes 1. 1. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + lavana lavana + + tikta+ tikta+ katu katu 2. 2. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + lavana lavana + + tikta+kashaya tikta+kashaya 3. 3. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + lavana lavana +katu +katu + + kashaya kashaya 4. 4. Madhura Madhura + + lavana lavana + + tikta+ tikta+ katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 5. 5. Madhura Madhura + + amla amla + + tikta+ tiktat+ katu katu + + kashaya kashaya 6. 6. Amla Amla + + lavana lavana + + tikta tikta + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya Combination Combination ofof66 tastes tastes =1 =1 1. 1. Madhura Madhura + + Amla Amla + + lavana lavana + + tikta tikta + + katu katu + + kashaya kashaya ते रसानुरसतो Tatars रसभेदा तारत यप Raeweta रक पनया Tच a Taree HAT सं भवि त WA गणनां TAHA समतीता syAsaangyarsat: दोषमेषजवशादप ु यो याः These These Rasa Rasa (primary (primary tastes) tastes) and and Anurasas Anurasas (secondary (secondary tastes) tastes) in in their their proportional proportional (more, (more, moderate moderate and and less) less) combinations combinations become become innumerable. innumerable. These These are are to to be be selected selected and and used used after after considering considering the the conditions conditions of of the the Dosas Dosas and and drugs drugs (and (and therapies). therapies). 44. 44. Thus Thus ends ends the the chapter chapter entitled entitled Rasabhediya, Rasabhediya, the the tenth tenth in in Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Ashtangahurdayam. Ashtangahurdayam. Page Page No. No. 146 146 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Chapter व ानीयं -- Knowledge Chapter 11 11 Tridosha Tridosha -- दोषा arstieद faateite Knowledge of of doshas doshas th 11 wu" chapter chapter of of Sutrasthana Sutrasthana of of Ashtanga Ashtanga Hrudayam Hrudayam explains explains in in detail detail regarding regarding Tridosha Tridosha in in Ayurveda. Ayurveda. Tridosha Tridosha are are —– Vata, Vata, Pitta Pitta and and Kapha. Kapha. Understanding Understanding Tridosha Tridosha concept concept is is your your first first step step towards towards learning learning Ayurveda. Ayurveda. The The chapter chapter is is called called as as Doshadi Doshadi Vijnaneeya Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. Adhyaya. Chief Chief constituents constituents of of the the body body ::- Dehasya Dehasya Mulam Mulam —– दोषधात ह य || AVAम Hetूलं सदा Hel देSez ु ला म Dosha Dosha – — Vata, Vata, Pitta Pitta and and Kapha Kapha Dhatu Dhatu —– Body Body tissues tissues – — Rasa Rasa (lymph (lymph // product product of of digestion), digestion), Rakta Rakta (blood), (blood), Mamsa Mamsa (muscle), (muscle), Meda Meda (fat), (fat), Asthi Asthi (bone), (bone), Majja Majja (bone (bone marrow) marrow) and and Shukra Shukra (male (male and and female female reproductory reproductory secretions) secretions) Mala Mala —– waste waste products products —– sweat, sweat, urine urine and and faeces faeces Doshas, Doshas, are are the the roots roots of of the the body. body. 1. 1. Functions Functions of of normal normal Doshas Doshas – — Prakruta Prakruta Dosa Dosa Karma Karma —– Functions Functions of of Vata Vata Dosha Dosha -तं चलः a ae: उ साहो SaaS वास Faas न वास Aversa: चे टावे ग वतनैः Scag स य ग या च धातन अ ाणां Wedet पाटवेन Tच PFITCT F Meal ू ां HAO अन He 31st: ुग ृ णा त अ वकृतः Vata Vata is is responsible responsible for for all all movements. movements. (Movement (Movement of of blood blood in in blood blood vessels, vessels, movement movement of of nutrients, nutrients, movement movement of of air air in in lungs, lungs, locomotion locomotion movements movements of of hands hands and and legs legs etc. etc. )) In In its its normal normal state state Vata Vata causes causes enthusiasm, enthusiasm, Vatha Vatha Dosha Dosha regulates regulates respiration respiration process, process, Regulates Regulates all all locomotor locomotor movements, movements, Regulates Regulates all all activities activities of of mind, mind, speech, speech, initiation initiation of of natural natural urges urges (tears, (tears, faeces, faeces, urination, urination, sneezing, sneezing, coughing, coughing, vomiting vomiting yawning yawning etc) etc) maintenance maintenance of of the the Dhatus Dhatus (tissues) (tissues) in in their their normalcy normalcy and and proper proper functioning functioning of of the the sense sense organs. organs. Page Page No. No. 147 147 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Functions Functions of of Pitta Pitta Dosha Dosha —– प तं Taras प यू मदशनै ect eet: ः ु त ृ eramsraeretenerarepared: च भामेधाधीशौयतनम aieds ु ादवैः In In its its normal normal state state Pitta Pitta causes causes digestion digestion and and metabolism metabolism Maintenance Maintenance of of body body temperature, temperature, vision, vision, Causes Causes hunger, hunger, thirst, thirst, appetite, appetite, Maintains Maintains skin skin complexion, complexion, intelligence, intelligence, courage, courage, valour, valour, and and softness softness (suppleness) (suppleness) of of the the body. body. Functions Functions of of Kapha Kapha Dosha Dosha -ले माTEA ि थरcaविColनTeधcaवसि ध मा दPay: भः QaTSHT a foreधब ae eae Kapha joints, Kapha confers confers stability, stability, lubrication, lubrication, compactness compactness (firmness) (firmness) of of the the joints, Kshama Kshama -—–ItIt is is the the cause cause for for mental mental capacity capacity to to withstand withstand or or withhold withhold emotions, emotions, strains strains etc. etc. It It is is also also cause cause for for forgiveness forgiveness 1½ 1/4 —–3.3. Functions Functions of of body body tissues tissues and and waste waste products products —– Prakrita Prakrita Dhatu Dhatu Mala Mala Karma Karma – — Functions Functions of of body body tissues tissues – — Soret ीणनंsfraet जीवनं Au: लेपः Tetet नेहो MTOTTT धारणपूरणे गभ पाद चAa धातन े ठं कम मातTAA ् मत MIAME HH HATA ू ां WSS ृ म ् ४¥ Rasa Rasa Dhatu Dhatu (product (product of of digestion digestion and and metabolism) metabolism) —– provides provides nourishment nourishment Rakta Rakta (blood) (blood) maintenance maintenance of of life life activities, activities, Mamsa Mamsa (muscle) (muscle) —– enveloping enveloping (covering) (covering) – — it it covers covers around around bones bones and and enables enables voluntary voluntary and and involuntary involuntary actions actions Meda Meda (fat) (fat) – — lubrication, lubrication, Asthi Asthi (bones) (bones) —– support, support, forms forms the the framework framework of of the the body body Majja Majja (bone (bone marrow) marrow) —– filling filling the the inside inside of of the the bones bones and and Shukra Shukra (male (male and and female female reproduction reproduction system)system)- conception conception and and pregnancy pregnancy 4. 4. Page Page No. No. 148 148 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Functions Functions of of waste waste products products —– अव ट भः प मू य Felqa लेदवाहनम HACE: TOI, ety ् ुर ष य, FA aera वेद यFeralayia: लेद वध ृ तः Maintenance Maintenance of of strength strength of of the the body body is is the the chief chief function function of of faeces; faeces; Elimination Elimination of of moisture moisture (water) (water) is is of of urine, urine, and and Slow Slow elimination elimination of of moisture moisture is is of of the the sweat. sweat. 5. 5. Effects Effects of of increased increased Doshas Doshas —– Vriddha Vriddha Dosha Dosha Karma:Karma:Effects Effects of of increased increased Vata Vata —– Fatd Hed shore: व नलः ु ते अ ृ तु क का यका UGS यउAPN नका म वक पाना HAST शकृ हान ् PAT ACTPEMTAE बल न Fg े ि Aa य Toor ंश लाप नताः A TAAमदCTT: Vata, Vata, when when increased increased produces produces Karshya Karshya —– emaciation, emaciation, Karshnya black discoloration, Karshnya —–black discoloration, Ushnakamitva Ushnakamitva – — desire desire for for hot hot things, things, Kampa Kampa —– tremors tremors Anaha bloating, fullness, Anaha —–bloating, fullness, distention distention of of the the abdomen, abdomen, Shakrut constipation, Shakrut Graha Graha —–constipation, Bala loss of Bala bhramsha bhramsha – — loss of strength, strength, Nidra loss of Nidra bhramsha bhramsha – — loss of sleep sleep Indriya loss of Indriya bhramsha bhramsha —–loss of sensory sensory functions, functions, Pralapa Pralapa – — irrelevant irrelevant speech, speech, Bhrama Delusion, Dizziness Bhrama – — Delusion, Dizziness giddiness giddiness Deenata Deenata —– timidity timidity (peevishness). (peevishness). 5½ 5'2—– 6. 6. Effects Effects of of increase increase of of Pitta Pitta पीत व मNNू ने प तम ् Fede व ु तctृ दाहा प न ताः Pitta Pitta when when increased increased produces produces yellow yellow discoloration discoloration of of the the faeces, faeces, urine, urine, eyes, eyes, and and skin; skin; excess excess of of hunger hunger and and thirst, thirst, feeling feeling of of burning burning sensation sensation and and very very little little sleep.6 sleep.6 ½. 2. Page Page No. No. 149 149 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Effects Effects of of increased increased of of Kapha Kapha ले मा APSA अि नसदन ASAT HTAATN aA सेकाल यगौरवम A, ् वै यशै यशलथा ग वं वासकासा त न ताः MANAUS MAHA Aaeaga: Kapha, Kapha, when when increased increased produces produces Agnisadana Agnisadana – — weak weak digestive digestive activity, activity, Praseka Praseka —– excess excess salivation, salivation, Alasya Alasya – — lassitude, lassitude, laziness laziness Gaurava Gaurava – — feeling feeling of of heaviness, heaviness, Shvaithya Shvaithya —– white white discoloration, discoloration, Shaithya Shaithya —– coldness, coldness, Shlathangatva Shlathangatva – — looseness looseness of of the the body body parts, parts, Shwasa Shwasa – — dyspnoea, dyspnoea, asthma, asthma, COPD COPD Kasa Kasa – — cough, cough, cold cold Atinidrata – 7½. Atinidrata—– excess excess of of sleep. sleep. 7 7-71. Effects Effects of of increased increased body body tissues tissues – — Vriddha Vriddha Dhatu Dhatu Karma:Karma:रसो अFFप eevAad ले मवत ् Ta र तं Taaaceite वसप ल हfacet व धीन ् Tre कु ठवाता ता गOA POST AAA पAAT TPA: ु मोपक ु शकामलाः ASM य गाि TAMA ननाशस Aletta मोहर त वsa: ने मू ताः मां ग डाबुद ि थग डो दरवhea: Aeसं Wsriaaieyswseard ृ ताः क ठा दषु sad अ धमांसं च avorey 7 त व मेद तथा TAA मम ् aeaeAEAT अ पे अ चेि टते vated वासं Rareaalerrsay ि फ तनोदरल बनम ् Het afFप Uied अ य यस य धद तां च seememazatardea म जा ने ा गगौरवम ् पवसु थूलमूला न कुया कृ ाण अ ं ष च अ त ीकामतां Fs व ृ ं ash शु ं शHAVANT sara ु म मर 3अ प Rasa Rasa when when increased increased in in similar similar to to Kapha, Kapha, produces produces the the same same symptoms symptoms of of increased increased Kapha; Kapha; Rakta Rakta (blood) (blood) when when increased increased produces produces Visarpa Visarpa – — Herpes, Herpes, spreading spreading skin skin disease, disease, Pleeha Pleeha —– diseases diseases of of the the spleen, spleen, Vidradhi Vidradhi —– abscesses, abscesses, Kushta Kushta – — skin skin diseases diseases Vatasra Vatasra – — gout gout Pittasra Pittasra -- bleeding bleeding disease, disease, Gulma Gulma —– abdominal abdominal tumors, tumors, Page Page No. No. 150 150 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Upakusa Upakusa —–a a disease disease ofof the the teeth, teeth, Kamala jaundice, Kamala —– jaundice, Vyanga Vyanga —– discoloured discoloured patch patch on on the the face, face, Agninasha loss of Agninasha – — loss of digestion digestion strength strength Sammoha Sammoha – — Coma, Coma, unconsciousness, unconsciousness, Red Red discoloration discoloration of of the the skin, skin, eyes, eyes, and and urine. urine. 88 —– 9. 9. Mamsa Mamsa (muscle (muscle tissue), tissue), when when increased increased produces produces Ganda Ganda —– cervical cervical lymphadenitis lymphadenitis Granthi Granthi – — tumor, tumor, Increase Increase in in size size of of the the cheeks, cheeks, thighs, thighs, and and abdomen, abdomen, over over growth growth of of muscles muscles of of the the neck neck and and other other places places 9 9 – — 9½. 9/4. Medas Medas (fat (fat tissue), tissue), when when produces produces similar similar symptoms symptoms and and in in addition, addition, it it causes causes fatigue, fatigue, difficulty difficulty in in breathing breathing even even after after little little work, work, drooping drooping of of the the buttocks, buttocks, breasts breasts and and abdomen. abdomen. 9½ 9’ – — 10. 10. Asthi Asthi (bone (bone tissues), tissues), when when increased increased causes causes overgrowth overgrowth of of bones bones and and extra extra teeth. teeth. 10½. 10%. Majja Majja (marrow), (marrow), when when increased increased produces produces heaviness heaviness of of the the eyes eyes and and the the body, body, increase increase of of size size of joints and of the the body body joints and causes causes ulcers ulcers which which are are difficult difficult to to cure. cure. 10½ 10’2—– 11½. 11%. Shukra Shukra (semen) (semen) when when increased increased produces produces great great desire desire for for the the woman woman (sexual (sexual desire) desire) and and seminal seminal calculi calculi (spermolith). (spermolith). 12. 12. Effects Effects of of increased increased waste waste products products —– Vriddha Vriddha Mala Mala Karma Karma —– क आटोपं sd गौरवं age वेदनां eepet शकृत ् HATAcAe ु ावा मानं set मू ं त ु बि त न तोदं कृ ते अ यकृतसं ताम ् Taal वेदो sifaede अ त वेद abieea दौग य pug: क डूः Shakrit Shakrit (feaces), (feaces), when when increased increased causes causes distension distension of of abdomen, abdomen, gurgling gurgling noise noise and and feeling feeling of of heaviness. heaviness. 12½ 12'4 Mutra Mutra (urine), (urine), when when increased increased produces produces severe severe pain pain in in the the bladder bladder and and feeling feeling of of non-elimination non-elimination even even after after urination. urination. 13 13 Sweda Sweda (sweat) (sweat) when when increased increased produces produces excess excess of of perspiration, perspiration, foul foul smell smell and and itching. itching. 13½ 134 एवं च येत ् Ud wT ल aad Qeenraray द मलान ् aera बाहु यगु wATe ता दAa: भः ू षकाद न प Aetel The The increase increase of of Dushika Dushika (excretion (excretion of of the the eyes) eyes) and and other other waste waste products products are are to to be be understood understood by by nothing nothing their their increased increased quantity, quantity, heaviness heaviness (of (of their their sites) sites) and and such such other other symptoms. symptoms. 14. 14. Page Page No. No. 151 151 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Functions Functions decreased decreased Doshas Doshas – — Ksheena Ksheena Doshakarma Doshakarma -Decreased Decreased Vata Vata produces produces symptoms symptoms like like – — ल गं ीणे अ नले अ ग य सदो अ प भा षते हतम ् सं ामोह तथा LASAGE ले मव ृ EAS यु AAMT तामाशायसESTE: भवः Paraleeareyr Angasada Angasada —– debility debility of of the the body, body, Alpa Alpa bhashite bhashite hitam hitam —– the the person person speaks speaks very very little little Sanjna loss of Sanjna moha moha – — loss of sensation sensation (awareness) (awareness) and and of of consciousness consciousness and and occurrence occurrence of of all all the the symptoms symptoms of of increased increased Kapha. Kapha. 15. 15. Decreased Decreased Pitta Pitta causes causes प ते Feel म दो 3teter: अनलः शीतं भाहा नः facd itt warrerfer: Mande Mande anala anala —– weakness weakness of of digestive digestive activity, activity, Shaitya Shaitya —– coldness coldness and and Prabha Prabha hani hani – — loss loss of of luster luster (complexion). (complexion). 15½. 15%. Decrease Decrease of of Kapha Kapha causes causes apy े ayA: कफ मः ले माशयानां श धता CAAA UerUed Mewalesa4 ू य वं Feed:वः शलथसि Bhrama Bhrama —– Delusion, Delusion, Dizziness, Dizziness, Shunyatva Shunyatva – — emptiness emptiness of of the the organs organs of of Kapha, Kapha, hrudrava hrudrava – — tremors tremors of of the the heart heart (palpitation) (palpitation) and and Shlatha the joints. joints. 16. Shlatha sandhita sandhita – — looseness looseness ofofthe 16. Symptoms Symptoms of of decrease decrease of of Dhatu Dhatu (body (body tissues) tissues) —– रसे रौ यं sa: मः शोषो ला नः श दास ह olay णत Te thee erst gorfet: Meenas ु ा र तेअ ल श शरAARNAM ी त शराशैAe थ य ताः TEAM A SET: मां ला नग डि फ शु कतासं धवेदनाः ARसे अ serrerfersusteweesp a reldeal: मे दस Aa व नं क याः ल हो व ृ ः क ृ शा गता Tact Hear-cehel Phe: PeTseTaT अ यि थतोदः सदनं तकेशनखा दषु seeaeaAMa: Wet दGeahwrraMiey अ नां म ज न सौ षय त मरदशनम ् Reta Asatte STS sar:मः fateagar श चरात ् wieeatt स येत श नतमेव aT वा aु े PR Usु ं शो eiferaAa तोदो यथ qeoratiga वष ater अ seaet qaradia a ूमायतीव च ृ णयोम म ् ध Page Page No. No. 152 152 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Decrease Decrease of of Rasa Rasa dhatu dhatu produces produces dryness, dryness, fatigue, fatigue, emaciation, emaciation, exhaustion exhaustion without without any any work work and and noise noise intolerance. intolerance. Decrease Decrease of of Rakta Rakta produces produces desire desire for for sour sour and and cold cold things, things, loss loss of of tension tension of of veins veins (and (and arteries) arteries) and and dryness. dryness. 17. 17. Decrease Decrease of of Mamsa Mamsa causes causes debility debility of of the the sense sense organs, organs, emaciation emaciation of of cheeks, cheeks, buttocks buttocks and and pain pain in joints. 17½. in the the joints. 17%. Decrease Decrease of of Medas Medas causes causes loss loss of of sensation sensation in in the the waist, waist, enlargement enlargement of of spleen spleen and and emaciation emaciation of of the the body. body. 18. 18. Decrease the joints, joints, falling Decrease of of Asthi Asthi causes causes pain pain in in the falling off off of of the the teeth, teeth, hairs, hairs, nails nails etc. etc. 18½. 18'4. Decrease Decrease of of Majja Majja causes causes hollowness hollowness (of (of the the bones bones inside) inside) giddiness giddiness and and seeing seeing of of darkness darkness 19. 19. Decrease Decrease of of Shukra Shukra results results in in delay delay in in ejaculation, ejaculation, ejaculation ejaculation accompanied accompanied with with bleeding, bleeding, severe severe pain pain in in the the testicles testicles and and aa feeling feeling of of hot hot fumes fumes coming coming out out of of the the urethra. urethra. 20. 20. Symptoms Symptoms of of decreased decreased waste waste products products —– प रु षे AAT वायुर ा ण सश टयि नव WS Beiselदो वेaveaieaa क pet ु ौ म त या यू व ecued पा व पीडयन श aaa aeqed dsael ् भ aerey ृ म् म मू ये कृ ात ् faavt ववण waAa सा मेव वा FIू े अ Hodपं AaAcpegre a वेदे रोम यु तः FARIA त धरोमता Epes फुटनं cra: वचः Fae Vaeaie: मलानाम ल ल येत ् aa यम ् AMA त स FEAT Golea ू माणां द ु यं Hea वमलायनसंशोषतोदश य वलाघवैः PARAM Ae ू Aeros: Decrease Decrease of of faeces faeces gives gives rise rise to to gurgling gurgling noise noise in in the the intestines intestines and and bloating, bloating, vata vata moves moves in in upward upward direction direction in in the the intestine intestine causing causing discomfort discomfort and and pain pain in in the the region region of of the the heart heart and and flanks. flanks. 21. 21. Decrease Decrease of of urine urine causes causes scanty scanty urination, urination, dysuria, dysuria, urine urine discoloration discoloration or or hematuria. hematuria. 21½. 211. Decrease Decrease of of sweat sweat leads leads to to falling falling of of hair, hair, stiffness stiffness of of hair hair and and cracking cracking of of the the skin. skin. 22. 22. Decrease Decrease of of Malas Malas which which are are of of little little quantity quantity is is difficult difficult to to perceive, perceive, it it should should be be inferred inferred from from the the dryness, dryness, pricking pricking pain, pain, emptiness emptiness and and tightness tightness of of their their sites sites of of production production and and elimination. elimination. 23. 23. दोषाद नां Uared यथा वं च व या qiearat वृ यौ भषक् arstdlat a facarea rv येण facta वपर तानां Toe गण वधनेन च ardor a ु ानां ater वृ ं मलानां स गा च Page Page No. No. 153 153 यं चा त वसगतः Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan The The decrease decrease of of Dosha Dosha Dhatu Dhatu etc etc can can be be observed observed by by the the increase increase of of opposite opposite qualities. qualities. The The increase increase of of Dosha Dosha Dhatu Dhatu etc etc can can be be observed observed by by the the increase increase of of similar similar qualities. qualities. The The increase increase of of Malas Malas is is observed observed by by their their non-elimination non-elimination (too (too much much of of waste waste product product accumulation accumulation leading leading to to obstruction) obstruction) and and their their decrease decrease by by too too much much of of elimination elimination in in little little quantities. quantities. 23½ 23’ —– 24½. 241%. मलो चत वात ् Cees दे ह य eat यो gfeed वृ तु tsar: पीडनः ANfalacae Body Body being being accustomed accustomed to to accumulation accumulation of of waste waste products products (in (in intestines intestines and and bladder) bladder) ,, the the decrease decrease of of waste waste product product formation formation is is more more troublesome troublesome than than their their increase. increase. 25. 25. Relationship Relationship between between Dosha Dosha and and Dhatu Dhatu त ा था न िfect थतो वाय प तं त वेदर तयोः career ary:,ःु , ed I ु Faerrcat: geaAT AVG, srsया आ sree ले मा शे षेषु, deter तेनैषां आ यणां Fre: मथः ये दक य तद य य Terao वधन पणौषधम AeHeT AGATA yey ् अि मा तयोः नै ataथ ard: aaवं Vata Vata resides resides in in Asthi Asthi (bones) (bones) Pitta Pitta resides resides in in Sweda Sweda (sweat) (sweat) and and Rakta Rakta (blood) (blood) Kapha Kapha resides resides in in rest rest of of the the Dhatu Dhatu and and Mala. Mala. In In case case of of Pitta Pitta and and Kapha, Kapha, when when there there is is an an increase increase of of Pitta Pitta or or Kapha, Kapha, there there is is also also respective respective increase increase of of tissues tissues and and waste waste products products associated associated with with them. them. For For example, example, if if Pitta Pitta increases, increases, then then sweat sweat and and blood blood vitiation vitiation also also increases. increases. The The same same rule rule applies applies to to decrease decrease as as well. well. But But in in case case of of Vata, Vata, if if Vata Vata decreases, decreases, then then Asthi Asthi increases. increases. They They are are inverse inverse proportionately proportionately related related with with each each other. other. 26 26 – — 27. 27. Cause Cause for for increase increase or or decrease decrease of of Dosha Dosha व ृ ह AIT तपणात ् Waायो dete शले मणा HLTA अनुगता ACAI त मात ्Users: स यः cafarsard त वपययात ् MAA वायुना HETA अनुगतो TEAST त मा च Gea वृ य AA समAATCL ु वान ् AGM वकारान ् Head साधयेत ् शी मात ् aseetgett: ल घनबंह faerie ets ं Har ृ णैः वायो य , dsattd त जां तु Ra तैरेव sowratard: उ मयोिजतैः atew, The The increase increase of of Doshas, Doshas, Dhatus Dhatus and and Mala Mala is is usually usually due due to to excess excess nutrition nutrition (Tarpana), (Tarpana), which which is is followed followed later later on on with with increase increase of of Kapha. Kapha. Whereas Whereas the the decrease decrease of of Doshas, Doshas, Dhatus Dhatus and and Malas Malas is is due due to to loss loss of of nutrition nutrition which which is is followed, followed, later later with with increase increase of of Vayu Vayu (Vata). (Vata). Page Page No. No. 154 154 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Hence, Hence, the the diseases diseases arising arising from from increase increase of of Dosha Dosha and and Dhatu Dhatu should should be be usually usually treated treated quick quick by by adopting adopting Langhana Langhana (therapy (therapy causing causing thinning thinning of of the the body, body, reducing reducing the the quantity) quantity) The The diseases diseases arising arising from from the the decrease decrease of of Dosha Dosha and and Dhatu Dhatu should should be be treated treated with with Brimhana Brimhana therapy therapy (causing (causing stoutening stoutening the the body, body, increasing increasing the the quantity quantity etc.) etc.) But But in in case case of of Vata, Vata, the the order order is is reverse. reverse. If If Vata Vata is is increased, increased, then then Brihmana Brihmana therapy therapy (nourishing (nourishing therapy) therapy) should should be be adopted adopted and and if if Vata Vata decreases decreases then then Langhana Langhana therapy therapy should should be be adopted. adopted. 28 28 —– 29. 29. वशेषा तव ृ यथ र त ु त वरे चनैः farleraragqaeyerel ु ान ् tecaiatataet: मांAg सवeetae रोगान ् श ाराि नकम भः arexeroferaih: ृ भवान ् WaTreL थौ यका य पचारे ण मे दोजानि थस यात ् Faleraratraner Achareahexaqseart जाता ीरघteary त ै ि त भEAT तथा marae ुतब ृ िै त तसंयtae व व ृ जानतीसार यया, व यो वान ् ATTA मेषाजम HEATIAGATI यकु माषयवमाष IAT वया दAa: भः म यो थां च मे हकृ च क सया Fagard Agpestatecaar ू वृ यायामा य जन वे दम यैः Tag वे दaAयो AaTey वान ् CARATATSFASAACAGHE: In In particular particular the the disease disease arising arising from from -- increase increase of of rakta rakta should should be be treated treated withwith- a. a. blood blood letting letting and and b. b. Purgations. Purgations. Increase Increase of of mamsa mamsa by by use use of of -- a. a. sharp sharp instruments instruments (surgery), (surgery), b. b. caustic caustic alkalies alkalies and, and, c. c. fire fire cautery. cautery. Increase Increase of of medas medas by by therapies therapies indicated indicated for for obesity, obesity, and and decrease decrease by by therapies therapies indicated indicated for for emaciation. emaciation. Decrease Decrease of of asthi asthi by by enema enema therapy therapy using using -- a. a. milk, milk, b. b. ghee ghee and, and, c. c. bitter bitter drugs. drugs. Increase Increase of of vit vit// feces feces by by the the use use of of -- a. a. abdominal abdominal viscera viscera of of ram ram or or goat, goat, b. b. half half steamed steamed pulses, pulses, c. c. barley barley and, and, d. d. the the two two varieties varieties of of masha masha etc. etc. as as food. food. Increase Increase and and decrease decrease of of mutra mutra // urine urine -- By By adopting adopting treatments treatments indicated indicated for for diabetes diabetes and and dysuria dysuria respectively. respectively. Decrease Decrease of of sveda sveda // sweat sweat by by adopting adopting -- a. a. physical physical exercises, exercises, b. b. oil oil bath, bath, c. c. sudation sudation therapies therapies and and d. d. use use of of wine. wine. Page Page No. No. 155 155 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Kayagni Kayagni FACUALATT FLATT TAYषु ु सं AAA:ताः व थान थ य काया ने रंशा धात ते तद ि त यां धात व यो वः ु ृ autषां सादा arafaditasa ordagieaatea: पूव erg: धातःु परं ीण च ache त वधम ् yaf Wt क Hatege: ु या व ृ ः afore Kayagni Kayagni present present in in its its own own place, place, has has portions portions of of itself, itself, present present in in the the dhatus dhatus also. also. Their Their decrease decrease in in qualities, qualities, quantities quantities or or functions functions give give rise rise to to increase increase and and decrease decrease of of dhatus dhatus respectively. respectively. The The proceeding proceeding dhatu dhatu which which is is either either increased increased or or decreased decreased gives gives rise rise to to the the succeeding succeeding dhatu dhatu of of the the same same condition. condition. Effects Effects of of vitiated vitiated Doshas Doshas – — Dusta Dusta Dosha Dosha Karma Karma – — दोषा द रसैधातन दष मलान ् are qver Sart Aone ु टा Wetcetet ू न ् quated ू यि त उभये अधो स त PRA, शर स, ule खा न Caaaerfer वेदवहा न Tच HY aeवे ,, ara मला Aersenfet मलायना न TaAaed युयथा वं Asay ते वतोser: गदाः He The The Doshas Doshas which which are are vitiated vitiated [become [become abnormal abnormal undergoing undergoing either either increase increase or or decrease] decrease] cause cause vitiation vitiation of of the the Rasa Rasa and and other other Dhatus Dhatus (tissues) (tissues) next; next; Both Both Doshas Doshas and and Dhatus Dhatus together together vitiate vitiate the the Malas Malas (waste (waste products) products) which which in in turn, turn, vitiate vitiate the the Malayanas Malayanas (channels (channels of of their their elimination). elimination). Malayana routes of Malayana – — routes of elimination elimination of of waste waste products products are are – — two two below below —– anus anus and and urethra, urethra, seven seven in in the the head, head, and and the the channels channels of of sweat; sweat; from from these these vitiated vitiated channels channels develop develop their their connected connected diseases. diseases. 34½ 3414 – — 36. 36. Ojas Ojas – — the the essence essence of of Dhatus Dhatus ::ओज तु AMT ते जोधातन परं FATA म ृतम ् Heed Leeda ू ां श ु ा तानां WL दय थम प cay या प aereaia दे हि थ त feraekreay नब धनम ् FaUesAaTy ि are न धं Was सोमा मकं श ईषतoaeatanay ् लो हतपीतकम ् WEु ं SI य नाशे faad नयतं areit नाशो atateasofa यि मंि त ठ त fava त ठत Gent न प य ते यतो भावा व वधा दे हसं याः Ojas Ojas is is the the essence essence of of the the Dhatus; Dhatus; It It is is mainly mainly located located in in the the heart. heart. It It is is present present all all over over the the body body and and regulates regulates health. health. Page Page No. No. 156 156 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Qualities Qualities of of Oja Oja —– Snigdha Snigdha – — unctuous, unctuous, oily oily Somatmaka Somatmaka – — watery watery Shuddha clear (transparent), Shuddha – — clear (transparent), Ishat slight reddish Ishat Lohita Lohita Peetakam Peetakam – — slight reddish yellow yellow in in colour; colour; Loss life. Loss of of Ojus Ojus leads leads to to loss loss ofoflife. All All aspects aspects of of health health are are related related to to Ojas. Ojas. Cause Cause for for decrease decrease of of Ojas Ojas Hot: ओजः afar HIT acetate ीयेत कोप ु यानशोक saree: मा द भः वभो त द ब याय त catadiega: य थतेि यः fasifa gaet seflevtणं carafe ु लो अभी द ःु छायो द म GOR GH ु ना ाम च त wailो भवे sacarAvd Acaये जीवनीयौषध ीररसा या त achalasia भे षजम ् AVS Ojas Ojas undergoes undergoes decrease decrease in in quantity quantity by by anger, anger, hunger hunger (starvation), (starvation), worry, worry, grief, grief, exertion exertion etc., etc., Symptoms Symptoms of of Ojas Ojas decrease decrease —– The The person person becomes becomes fretful, fretful, debilitated, debilitated, repeatedly repeatedly worries worries without without any any reason, reason, feels feels discomfort discomfort in in sense sense organs, organs, develops develops bad bad complexion, complexion, negative negative thoughts thoughts and and dryness; dryness; Treatment Treatment – — Use Use of of drugs drugs of of Jivaniya Jivaniya group group (Enlivening) (Enlivening) (mentioned (mentioned in in chapter chapter 15) 15) milk, milk, meat meat juice etc. Juice etc. 39 39 —– 40. 40. Notes Notes ::- Many Many more more causes causes of of decrease decrease of of Ojas Ojas have have been been mentioned mentioned in in other other texts texts of of Ayurdeva, Ayurdeva, they they are are Ativyayama Ativyayama -- too too much much exercise exercise Anashana fasting for Anashana – — fasting for long long periods periods of of time time Alpasana Alpasana -- eating eating less less quantities quantities of of food food Rooksapana Rooksapana (intake (intake of of alcoholic alcoholic beverages beverages which which cause cause dryness), dryness), Pramitasana Pramitasana (intake (intake of of mixture mixture of of good good and and bad bad foods), foods), Bhaya Bhaya (fear), (fear), Prajagara Prajagara (waking (waking up up at at night), night), Abhighata Abhighata (injury), (injury), Abhishanga Abhishanga (assault (assault by by evil evil spirits; spirits; micro micro organisms organisms like like bacteria, bacteria, virus virus etc.), etc.), Dhatukshaya Dhatukshaya (depletion (depletion of of tissues tissues such such as as by by haemorrhage haemorrhage etc.), etc.), Ativisarga Ativisarga (too (too much much of of elimination) elimination) of of Kapha, Kapha, Sonita Sonita (blood), (blood), Sukra Sukra (semen) (semen) and and Mala Mala (waste (waste products); products); Visha Visha (ingestion (ingestion of of poison) poison) Increase Increase of of Ojas Ojas ओजोव ह य त िु टपुि टबलोदयः Heigelृ ौ fFह देtees aiseyeacttes: Increase Increase of of Ojas Ojas makes makes for for contentment, contentment, nourishment nourishment of of the the body body and and increase increase of of strength. strength. 41. 41. Page Page No. No. 157 157 Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sutrasthan यद deedनं वेि ट यद ाथयेता वरो ध त caise gateप meaarates Jु त ये ज न सम नं च तौ तौ व यौ जये acto ् Tava at ct gigarat saaत ् ृ The The increase increase of of Doshas Doshas should should be be controlled controlled by by avoidance avoidance of of foods foods which which are are disliked. disliked. The The decrease decrease of of Doshas Doshas should should be be managed managed by by foods foods indulgence indulgence of of food food that that are are desired. desired. 42. 42. aad ater fanart: क वपर तसमानयोः ु वते feह ofaच ं दोषा व gar: ृ ाः ीणा च भ य यबध ators sas aatIecageed 7 ू य ठं ल ु ा तु न The The Doshas Doshas which which have have undergone undergone increase increase and and decrease decrease generally generally produce produce desire desire for for foods foods which which are are dissimilar dissimilar and and similar similar (in (in properties properties to to those those of of the the Doshas) Doshas) respectively; respectively; but but the the unintelligent unintelligent person person do do not not recognize recognize them. them. 43. 43. aust यथा BUI वं च vg दोषा erst व gel यथाबलं वत वते ृ ा fadedd पा ण, जहा ीणाः, समाः Sarr, sretferत afton:, W